The Project Gutenberg eBook of An Essay Concerning Humane Understanding, Volume 1
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: An Essay Concerning Humane Understanding, Volume 1

Author: John Locke

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10615]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Steve Harris and David Widger


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY CONCERNING HUMANE UNDERSTANDING, VOLUME 1 ***

An Essay Concerning Humane Understanding

IN FOUR BOOKS

By John Locke

[image]


_Quam bellum est velle confiteri potius nescire quod nescias, quam ista
effutientem nauseare, atque ipsum sibi displicere!_

Cic. de Natur. Deor. _l_. 1.




LONDON:

Printed by Eliz. Holt, for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, near
St. Dunstan’s Church.

MDCXC




CONTENTS

 THE EPISTLE TO THE READER
 ESSAY CONCERNING HUMANE UNDERSTANDING.

 BOOK I NEITHER PRINCIPLES NOR IDEAS ARE INNATE
 CHAPTER I. INTRODUCTION.
 CHAPTER II. NO INNATE SPECULATIVE PRINCIPLES.
 CHAPTER III. NO INNATE PRACTICAL PRINCIPLES
 CHAPTER IV. OTHER CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING INNATE PRINCIPLES, BOTH SPECULATIVE AND PRACTICAL.

 BOOK II OF IDEAS
 CHAPTER I. OF IDEAS IN GENERAL, AND THEIR ORIGINAL.
 CHAPTER II. OF SIMPLE IDEAS.
 CHAPTER III. OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF SENSE.
 CHAPTER IV. IDEA OF SOLIDITY.
 CHAPTER V. OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF DIVERS SENSES.
 CHAPTER VI. OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF REFLECTION.
 CHAPTER VII. OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF BOTH SENSATION AND REFLECTION.
 CHAPTER VIII. SOME FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING OUR SIMPLE IDEAS OF SENSATION.
 CHAPTER IX. OF PERCEPTION.
 CHAPTER X. OF RETENTION.
 CHAPTER XI. OF DISCERNING, AND OTHER OPERATIONS OF THE MIND.
 CHAPTER XII. OF COMPLEX IDEAS.
 CHAPTER XIII. COMPLEX IDEAS OF SIMPLE MODES:—AND FIRST, OF THE SIMPLE MODES OF IDEA OF SPACE.
 CHAPTER XIV. IDEA OF DURATION AND ITS SIMPLE MODES.
 CHAPTER XV. IDEAS OF DURATION AND EXPANSION, CONSIDERED TOGETHER.
 CHAPTER XVI. IDEA OF NUMBER.
 CHAPTER XVII. OF INFINITY.
 CHAPTER XVIII. OTHER SIMPLE MODES.
 CHAPTER XIX. OF THE MODES OF THINKING.
 CHAPTER XX. OF MODES OF PLEASURE AND PAIN.
 CHAPTER XXI. OF POWER.
 CHAPTER XXII. OF MIXED MODES.
 CHAPTER XXIII. OF OUR COMPLEX IDEAS OF SUBSTANCES.
 CHAPTER XXIV. OF COLLECTIVE IDEAS OF SUBSTANCES.
 CHAPTER XXV. OF RELATION.
 CHAPTER XXVI. OF CAUSE AND EFFECT, AND OTHER RELATIONS.
 CHAPTER XXVII. OF IDENTITY AND DIVERSITY.
 CHAPTER XXVIII. OF OTHER RELATIONS.
 CHAPTER XXIX. OF CLEAR AND OBSCURE, DISTINCT AND CONFUSED IDEAS.
 CHAPTER XXX. OF REAL AND FANTASTICAL IDEAS.
 CHAPTER XXXI. OF ADEQUATE AND INADEQUATE IDEAS.
 CHAPTER XXXII. OF TRUE AND FALSE IDEAS.
 CHAPTER XXXIII. OF THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.




TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THOMAS, EARL OF PEMBROKE AND MONTGOMERY, BARON
HERBERT OF CARDIFF LORD ROSS, OF KENDAL, PAR, FITZHUGH, MARMION, ST.
QUINTIN, AND SHURLAND;

LORD PRESIDENT OF HIS MAJESTY’S MOST HONOURABLE PRIVY COUNCIL; AND LORD
LIEUTENANT OF THE COUNTY OF WILTS, AND OF SOUTH WALES.

MY LORD,

This Treatise, which is grown up under your lordship’s eye, and has
ventured into the world by your order, does now, by a natural kind of
right, come to your lordship for that protection which you several
years since promised it. It is not that I think any name, how great
soever, set at the beginning of a book, will be able to cover the
faults that are to be found in it. Things in print must stand and fall
by their own worth, or the reader’s fancy. But there being nothing more
to be desired for truth than a fair unprejudiced hearing, nobody is
more likely to procure me that than your lordship, who are allowed to
have got so intimate an acquaintance with her, in her more retired
recesses. Your lordship is known to have so far advanced your
speculations in the most abstract and general knowledge of things,
beyond the ordinary reach or common methods, that your allowance and
approbation of the design of this Treatise will at least preserve it
from being condemned without reading, and will prevail to have those
parts a little weighed, which might otherwise perhaps be thought to
deserve no consideration, for being somewhat out of the common road.
The imputation of Novelty is a terrible charge amongst those who judge
of men’s heads, as they do of their perukes, by the fashion, and can
allow none to be right but the received doctrines. Truth scarce ever
yet carried it by vote anywhere at its first appearance: new opinions
are always suspected, and usually opposed, without any other reason but
because they are not already common. But truth, like gold, is not the
less so for being newly brought out of the mine. It is trial and
examination must give it price, and not any antique fashion; and though
it be not yet current by the public stamp, yet it may, for all that, be
as old as nature, and is certainly not the less genuine. Your lordship
can give great and convincing instances of this, whenever you please to
oblige the public with some of those large and comprehensive
discoveries you have made of truths hitherto unknown, unless to some
few, from whom your lordship has been pleased not wholly to conceal
them. This alone were a sufficient reason, were there no other, why I
should dedicate this Essay to your lordship; and its having some little
correspondence with some parts of that nobler and vast system of the
sciences your lordship has made so new, exact, and instructive a
draught of, I think it glory enough, if your lordship permit me to
boast, that here and there I have fallen into some thoughts not wholly
different from yours. If your lordship think fit that, by your
encouragement, this should appear in the world, I hope it may be a
reason, some time or other, to lead your lordship further; and you will
allow me to say, that you here give the world an earnest of something
that, if they can bear with this, will be truly worth their
expectation. This, my lord, shows what a present I here make to your
lordship; just such as the poor man does to his rich and great
neighbour, by whom the basket of flowers or fruit is not ill taken,
though he has more plenty of his own growth, and in much greater
perfection. Worthless things receive a value when they are made the
offerings of respect, esteem, and gratitude: these you have given me so
mighty and peculiar reasons to have, in the highest degree, for your
lordship, that if they can add a price to what they go along with,
proportionable to their own greatness, I can with confidence brag, I
here make your lordship the richest present you ever received. This I
am sure, I am under the greatest obligations to seek all occasions to
acknowledge a long train of favours I have received from your lordship;
favours, though great and important in themselves, yet made much more
so by the forwardness, concern, and kindness, and other obliging
circumstances, that never failed to accompany them. To all this you are
pleased to add that which gives yet more weight and relish to all the
rest: you vouchsafe to continue me in some degrees of your esteem, and
allow me a place in your good thoughts, I had almost said friendship.
This, my lord, your words and actions so constantly show on all
occasions, even to others when I am absent, that it is not vanity in me
to mention what everybody knows: but it would be want of good manners
not to acknowledge what so many are witnesses of, and every day tell me
I am indebted to your lordship for. I wish they could as easily assist
my gratitude, as they convince me of the great and growing engagements
it has to your lordship. This I am sure, I should write of the
UNDERSTANDING without having any, if I were not extremely sensible of
them, and did not lay hold on this opportunity to testify to the world
how much I am obliged to be, and how much I am,

MY LORD,

Your Lordship’s most humble and most obedient servant,

JOHN LOCKE

2 Dorset Court, 24th of May, 1689




THE EPISTLE TO THE READER

READER,

I have put into thy hands what has been the diversion of some of my
idle and heavy hours. If it has the good luck to prove so of any of
thine, and thou hast but half so much pleasure in reading as I had in
writing it, thou wilt as little think thy money, as I do my pains, ill
bestowed. Mistake not this for a commendation of my work; nor conclude,
because I was pleased with the doing of it, that therefore I am fondly
taken with it now it is done. He that hawks at larks and sparrows has
no less sport, though a much less considerable quarry, than he that
flies at nobler game: and he is little acquainted with the subject of
this treatise—the UNDERSTANDING—who does not know that, as it is the
most elevated faculty of the soul, so it is employed with a greater and
more constant delight than any of the other. Its searches after truth
are a sort of hawking and hunting, wherein the very pursuit makes a
great part of the pleasure. Every step the mind takes in its progress
towards Knowledge makes some discovery, which is not only new, but the
best too, for the time at least.

For the understanding, like the eye, judging of objects only by its own
sight, cannot but be pleased with what it discovers, having less regret
for what has escaped it, because it is unknown. Thus he who has raised
himself above the alms-basket, and, not content to live lazily on
scraps of begged opinions, sets his own thoughts on work, to find and
follow truth, will (whatever he lights on) not miss the hunter’s
satisfaction; every moment of his pursuit will reward his pains with
some delight; and he will have reason to think his time not ill spent,
even when he cannot much boast of any great acquisition.

This, Reader, is the entertainment of those who let loose their own
thoughts, and follow them in writing; which thou oughtest not to envy
them, since they afford thee an opportunity of the like diversion, if
thou wilt make use of thy own thoughts in reading. It is to them, if
they are thy own, that I refer myself: but if they are taken upon trust
from others, it is no great matter what they are; they are not
following truth, but some meaner consideration; and it is not worth
while to be concerned what he says or thinks, who says or thinks only
as he is directed by another. If thou judgest for thyself I know thou
wilt judge candidly, and then I shall not be harmed or offended,
whatever be thy censure. For though it be certain that there is nothing
in this Treatise of the truth whereof I am not fully persuaded, yet I
consider myself as liable to mistakes as I can think thee, and know
that this book must stand or fall with thee, not by any opinion I have
of it, but thy own. If thou findest little in it new or instructive to
thee, thou art not to blame me for it. It was not meant for those that
had already mastered this subject, and made a thorough acquaintance
with their own understandings; but for my own information, and the
satisfaction of a few friends, who acknowledged themselves not to have
sufficiently considered it.

Were it fit to trouble thee with the history of this Essay, I should
tell thee, that five or six friends meeting at my chamber, and
discoursing on a subject very remote from this, found themselves
quickly at a stand, by the difficulties that rose on every side. After
we had awhile puzzled ourselves, without coming any nearer a resolution
of those doubts which perplexed us, it came into my thoughts that we
took a wrong course; and that before we set ourselves upon inquiries of
that nature, it was necessary to examine our own abilities, and see
what OBJECTS our understandings were, or were not, fitted to deal with.
This I proposed to the company, who all readily assented; and thereupon
it was agreed that this should be our first inquiry. Some hasty and
undigested thoughts, on a subject I had never before considered, which
I set down against our next meeting, gave the first entrance into this
Discourse; which having been thus begun by chance, was continued by
intreaty; written by incoherent parcels; and after long intervals of
neglect, resumed again, as my humour or occasions permitted; and at
last, in a retirement where an attendance on my health gave me leisure,
it was brought into that order thou now seest it.

This discontinued way of writing may have occasioned, besides others,
two contrary faults, viz., that too little and too much may be said in
it. If thou findest anything wanting, I shall be glad that what I have
written gives thee any desire that I should have gone further. If it
seems too much to thee, thou must blame the subject; for when I put pen
to paper, I thought all I should have to say on this matter would have
been contained in one sheet of paper; but the further I went the larger
prospect I had; new discoveries led me still on, and so it grew
insensibly to the bulk it now appears in. I will not deny, but possibly
it might be reduced to a narrower compass than it is, and that some
parts of it might be contracted, the way it has been writ in, by
catches, and many long intervals of interruption, being apt to cause
some repetitions. But to confess the truth, I am now too lazy, or too
busy, to make it shorter. I am not ignorant how little I herein consult
my own reputation, when I knowingly let it go with a fault, so apt to
disgust the most judicious, who are always the nicest readers. But they
who know sloth is apt to content itself with any excuse, will pardon me
if mine has prevailed on me, where I think I have a very good one. I
will not therefore allege in my defence, that the same notion, having
different respects, may be convenient or necessary to prove or
illustrate several parts of the same discourse, and that so it has
happened in many parts of this: but waiving that, I shall frankly avow
that I have sometimes dwelt long upon the same argument, and expressed
it different ways, with a quite different design. I pretend not to
publish this Essay for the information of men of large thoughts and
quick apprehensions; to such masters of knowledge I profess myself a
scholar, and therefore warn them beforehand not to expect anything
here, but what, being spun out of my own coarse thoughts, is fitted to
men of my own size, to whom, perhaps, it will not be unacceptable that
I have taken some pains to make plain and familiar to their thoughts
some truths which established prejudice, or the abstractedness of the
ideas themselves, might render difficult. Some objects had need be
turned on every side; and when the notion is new, as I confess some of
these are to me; or out of the ordinary road, as I suspect they will
appear to others, it is not one simple view of it that will gain it
admittance into every understanding, or fix it there with a clear and
lasting impression. There are few, I believe, who have not observed in
themselves or others, that what in one way of proposing was very
obscure, another way of expressing it has made very clear and
intelligible; though afterwards the mind found little difference in the
phrases, and wondered why one failed to be understood more than the
other. But everything does not hit alike upon every man’s imagination.
We have our understandings no less different than our palates; and he
that thinks the same truth shall be equally relished by every one in
the same dress, may as well hope to feast every one with the same sort
of cookery: the meat may be the same, and the nourishment good, yet
every one not be able to receive it with that seasoning; and it must be
dressed another way, if you will have it go down with some, even of
strong constitutions. The truth is, those who advised me to publish it,
advised me, for this reason, to publish it as it is: and since I have
been brought to let it go abroad, I desire it should be understood by
whoever gives himself the pains to read it. I have so little affection
to be in print, that if I were not flattered this Essay might be of
some use to others, as I think it has been to me, I should have
confined it to the view of some friends, who gave the first occasion to
it. My appearing therefore in print being on purpose to be as useful as
I may, I think it necessary to make what I have to say as easy and
intelligible to all sorts of readers as I can. And I had much rather
the speculative and quick-sighted should complain of my being in some
parts tedious, than that any one, not accustomed to abstract
speculations, or prepossessed with different notions, should mistake or
not comprehend my meaning.

It will possibly be censured as a great piece of vanity or insolence in
me, to pretend to instruct this our knowing age; it amounting to little
less, when I own, that I publish this Essay with hopes it may be useful
to others. But, if it may be permitted to speak freely of those who
with a feigned modesty condemn as useless what they themselves write,
methinks it savours much more of vanity or insolence to publish a book
for any other end; and he fails very much of that respect he owes the
public, who prints, and consequently expects men should read, that
wherein he intends not they should meet with anything of use to
themselves or others: and should nothing else be found allowable in
this Treatise, yet my design will not cease to be so; and the goodness
of my intention ought to be some excuse for the worthlessness of my
present. It is that chiefly which secures me from the fear of censure,
which I expect not to escape more than better writers. Men’s
principles, notions, and relishes are so different, that it is hard to
find a book which pleases or displeases all men. I acknowledge the age
we live in is not the least knowing, and therefore not the most easy to
be satisfied. If I have not the good luck to please, yet nobody ought
to be offended with me. I plainly tell all my readers, except half a
dozen, this Treatise was not at first intended for them; and therefore
they need not be at the trouble to be of that number. But yet if any
one thinks fit to be angry and rail at it, he may do it securely, for I
shall find some better way of spending my time than in such kind of
conversation. I shall always have the satisfaction to have aimed
sincerely at truth and usefulness, though in one of the meanest ways.
The commonwealth of learning is not at this time without
master-builders, whose mighty designs, in advancing the sciences, will
leave lasting monuments to the admiration of posterity: but every one
must not hope to be a Boyle or a Sydenham; and in an age that produces
such masters as the great Huygenius and the incomparable Mr. Newton,
with some others of that strain, it is ambition enough to be employed
as an under-labourer in clearing the ground a little, and removing some
of the rubbish that lies in the way to knowledge;—which certainly had
been very much more advanced in the world, if the endeavours of
ingenious and industrious men had not been much cumbered with the
learned but frivolous use of uncouth, affected, or unintelligible
terms, introduced into the sciences, and there made an art of, to that
degree that Philosophy, which is nothing but the true knowledge of
things, was thought unfit or incapable to be brought into well-bred
company and polite conversation. Vague and insignificant forms of
speech, and abuse of language, have so long passed for mysteries of
science; and hard and misapplied words, with little or no meaning,
have, by prescription, such a right to be mistaken for deep learning
and height of speculation, that it will not be easy to persuade either
those who speak or those who hear them, that they are but the covers of
ignorance, and hindrance of true knowledge. To break in upon the
sanctuary of vanity and ignorance will be, I suppose, some service to
human understanding; though so few are apt to think they deceive or are
deceived in the use of words; or that the language of the sect they are
of has any faults in it which ought to be examined or corrected, that I
hope I shall be pardoned if I have in the Third Book dwelt long on this
subject, and endeavoured to make it so plain, that neither the
inveterateness of the mischief, nor the prevalency of the fashion,
shall be any excuse for those who will not take care about the meaning
of their own words, and will not suffer the significancy of their
expressions to be inquired into.

I have been told that a short Epitome of this Treatise, which was
printed in 1688, was by some condemned without reading, because INNATE
IDEAS were denied in it; they too hastily concluding, that if innate
ideas were not supposed, there would be little left either of the
notion or proof of spirits. If any one take the like offence at the
entrance of this Treatise, I shall desire him to read it through; and
then I hope he will be convinced, that the taking away false
foundations is not to the prejudice but advantage of truth, which is
never injured or endangered so much as when mixed with, or built on,
falsehood. In the Second Edition I added as followeth:—

The bookseller will not forgive me if I say nothing of this New
Edition, which he has promised, by the correctness of it, shall make
amends for the many faults committed in the former. He desires too,
that it should be known that it has one whole new chapter concerning
Identity, and many additions and amendments in other places. These I
must inform my reader are not all new matter, but most of them either
further confirmation of what I had said, or explications, to prevent
others being mistaken in the sense of what was formerly printed, and
not any variation in me from it.

I must only except the alterations I have made in Book II. chap. xxi.

What I had there written concerning Liberty and the Will, I thought
deserved as accurate a view as I am capable of; those subjects having
in all ages exercised the learned part of the world with questions and
difficulties, that have not a little perplexed morality and divinity,
those parts of knowledge that men are most concerned to be clear in.
Upon a closer inspection into the working of men’s minds, and a
stricter examination of those motives and views they are turned by, I
have found reason somewhat to alter the thoughts I formerly had
concerning that which gives the last determination to the Will in all
voluntary actions. This I cannot forbear to acknowledge to the world
with as much freedom and readiness; as I at first published what then
seemed to me to be right; thinking myself more concerned to quit and
renounce any opinion of my own, than oppose that of another, when truth
appears against it. For it is truth alone I seek, and that will always
be welcome to me, when or from whencesoever it comes. But what
forwardness soever I have to resign any opinion I have, or to recede
from anything I have writ, upon the first evidence of any error in it;
yet this I must own, that I have not had the good luck to receive any
light from those exceptions I have met with in print against any part
of my book, nor have, from anything that has been urged against it,
found reason to alter my sense in any of the points that have been
questioned. Whether the subject I have in hand requires often more
thought and attention than cursory readers, at least such as are
prepossessed, are willing to allow; or whether any obscurity in my
expressions casts a cloud over it, and these notions are made difficult
to others’ apprehensions in my way of treating them; so it is, that my
meaning, I find, is often mistaken, and I have not the good luck to be
everywhere rightly understood.

Of this the ingenious author of the Discourse Concerning the Nature of
Man has given me a late instance, to mention no other. For the civility
of his expressions, and the candour that belongs to his order, forbid
me to think that he would have closed his Preface with an insinuation,
as if in what I had said, Book II. ch. xxvii, concerning the third rule
which men refer their actions to, I went about to make virtue vice and
vice virtue, unless he had mistaken my meaning; which he could not have
done if he had given himself the trouble to consider what the argument
was I was then upon, and what was the chief design of that chapter,
plainly enough set down in the fourth section and those following. For
I was there not laying down moral rules, but showing the original and
nature of moral ideas, and enumerating the rules men make use of in
moral relations, whether these rules were true or false: and pursuant
thereto I tell what is everywhere called virtue and vice; which “alters
not the nature of things,” though men generally do judge of and
denominate their actions according to the esteem and fashion of the
place and sect they are of.

If he had been at the pains to reflect on what I had said, Bk. I. ch.
ii. sect. 18, and Bk. II. ch. xxviii. sect. 13, 14, 15 and 20, he would
have known what I think of the eternal and unalterable nature of right
and wrong, and what I call virtue and vice. And if he had observed that
in the place he quotes I only report as a matter of fact what OTHERS
call virtue and vice, he would not have found it liable to any great
exception. For I think I am not much out in saying that one of the
rules made use of in the world for a ground or measure of a moral
relation is—that esteem and reputation which several sorts of actions
find variously in the several societies of men, according to which they
are there called virtues or vices. And whatever authority the learned
Mr. Lowde places in his Old English Dictionary, I daresay it nowhere
tells him (if I should appeal to it) that the same action is not in
credit, called and counted a virtue, in one place, which, being in
disrepute, passes for and under the name of vice in another. The taking
notice that men bestow the names of ‘virtue’ and ‘vice’ according to
this rule of Reputation is all I have done, or can be laid to my charge
to have done, towards the making vice virtue or virtue vice. But the
good man does well, and as becomes his calling, to be watchful in such
points, and to take the alarm even at expressions, which, standing
alone by themselves, might sound ill and be suspected.

‘Tis to this zeal, allowable in his function, that I forgive his citing
as he does these words of mine (ch. xxviii. sect. II): “Even the
exhortations of inspired teachers have not feared to appeal to common
repute, Philip, iv. 8;” without taking notice of those immediately
preceding, which introduce them, and run thus: “Whereby even in the
corruption of manners, the true boundaries of the law of nature, which
ought to be the rule of virtue and vice, were pretty well preserved. So
that even the exhortations of inspired teachers,” &c. By which words,
and the rest of that section, it is plain that I brought that passage
of St. Paul, not to prove that the general measure of what men called
virtue and vice throughout the world was the reputation and fashion of
each particular society within itself; but to show that, though it were
so, yet, for reasons I there give, men, in that way of denominating
their actions, did not for the most part much stray from the Law of
Nature; which is that standing and unalterable rule by which they ought
to judge of the moral rectitude and gravity of their actions, and
accordingly denominate them virtues or vices. Had Mr. Lowde considered
this, he would have found it little to his purpose to have quoted this
passage in a sense I used it not; and would I imagine have spared the
application he subjoins to it, as not very necessary. But I hope this
Second Edition will give him satisfaction on the point, and that this
matter is now so expressed as to show him there was no cause for
scruple.

Though I am forced to differ from him in these apprehensions he has
expressed, in the latter end of his preface, concerning what I had said
about virtue and vice, yet we are better agreed than he thinks in what
he says in his third chapter (p. 78) concerning “natural inscription
and innate notions.” I shall not deny him the privilege he claims (p.
52), to state the question as he pleases, especially when he states it
so as to leave nothing in it contrary to what I have said. For,
according to him, “innate notions, being conditional things, depending
upon the concurrence of several other circumstances in order to the
soul’s exerting them,” all that he says for “innate, imprinted,
impressed notions” (for of innate IDEAS he says nothing at all),
amounts at last only to this—that there are certain propositions which,
though the soul from the beginning, or when a man is born, does not
know, yet “by assistance from the outward senses, and the help of some
previous cultivation,” it may AFTERWARDS come certainly to know the
truth of; which is no more than what I have affirmed in my First Book.
For I suppose by the “soul’s exerting them,” he means its beginning to
know them; or else the soul’s ‘exerting of notions’ will be to me a
very unintelligible expression; and I think at best is a very unfit one
in this, it misleading men’s thoughts by an insinuation, as if these
notions were in the mind before the ‘soul exerts them,’ i. e. before
they are known;—whereas truly before they are known, there is nothing
of them in the mind but a capacity to know them, when the ‘concurrence
of those circumstances,’ which this ingenious author thinks necessary
‘in order to the soul’s exerting them,’ brings them into our knowledge.

P. 52 I find him express it thus: ‘These natural notions are not so
imprinted upon the soul as that they naturally and necessarily exert
themselves (even in children and idiots) without any assistance from
the outward senses, or without the help of some previous cultivation.’
Here, he says, they ‘exert themselves,’ as p. 78, that the ‘soul exerts
them.’ When he has explained to himself or others what he means by ‘the
soul’s exerting innate notions,’ or their ‘exerting themselves;’ and
what that ‘previous cultivation and circumstances’ in order to their
being exerted are—he will I suppose find there is so little of
controversy between him and me on the point, bating that he calls that
‘exerting of notions’ which I in a more vulgar style call ‘knowing,’
that I have reason to think he brought in my name on this occasion only
out of the pleasure he has to speak civilly of me; which I must
gratefully acknowledge he has done everywhere he mentions me, not
without conferring on me, as some others have done, a title I have no
right to.

There are so many instances of this, that I think it justice to my
reader and myself to conclude, that either my book is plainly enough
written to be rightly understood by those who peruse it with that
attention and indifferency, which every one who will give himself the
pains to read ought to employ in reading; or else that I have written
mine so obscurely that it is in vain to go about to mend it. Whichever
of these be the truth, it is myself only am affected thereby; and
therefore I shall be far from troubling my reader with what I think
might be said in answer to those several objections I have met with, to
passages here and there of my book; since I persuade myself that he who
thinks them of moment enough to be concerned whether they are true or
false, will be able to see that what is said is either not well
founded, or else not contrary to my doctrine, when I and my opposer
come both to be well understood.

If any other authors, careful that none of their good thoughts should
be lost, have published their censures of my Essay, with this honour
done to it, that they will not suffer it to be an essay, I leave it to
the public to value the obligation they have to their critical pens,
and shall not waste my reader’s time in so idle or ill-natured an
employment of mine, as to lessen the satisfaction any one has in
himself, or gives to others, in so hasty a confutation of what I have
written.

The booksellers preparing for the Fourth Edition of my Essay, gave me
notice of it, that I might, if I had leisure, make any additions or
alterations I should think fit. Whereupon I thought it convenient to
advertise the reader, that besides several corrections I had made here
and there, there was one alteration which it was necessary to mention,
because it ran through the whole book, and is of consequence to be
rightly understood. What I thereupon said was this:—

CLEAR and DISTINCT ideas are terms which, though familiar and frequent
in men’s mouths, I have reason to think every one who uses does not
perfectly understand. And possibly ‘tis but here and there one who
gives himself the trouble to consider them so far as to know what he
himself or others precisely mean by them. I have therefore in most
places chose to put DETERMINATE or DETERMINED, instead of CLEAR and
DISTINCT, as more likely to direct men’s thoughts to my meaning in this
matter. By those denominations, I mean some object in the mind, and
consequently determined, i. e. such as it is there seen and perceived
to be. This, I think, may fitly be called a determinate or determined
idea, when such as it is at any time objectively in the mind, and so
determined there, it is annexed, and without variation determined, to a
name or articulate sound, which is to be steadily the sign of that very
same object of the mind, or determinate idea.

To explain this a little more particularly. By DETERMINATE, when
applied to a simple idea, I mean that simple appearance which the mind
has in its view, or perceives in itself, when that idea is said to be
in it: by DETERMINED, when applied to a complex idea, I mean such an
one as consists of a determinate number of certain simple or less
complex ideas, joined in such a proportion and situation as the mind
has before its view, and sees in itself, when that idea is present in
it, or should be present in it, when a man gives a name to it. I say
SHOULD be, because it is not every one, nor perhaps any one, who is so
careful of his language as to use no word till he views in his mind the
precise determined idea which he resolves to make it the sign of. The
want of this is the cause of no small obscurity and confusion in men’s
thoughts and discourses.

I know there are not words enough in any language to answer all the
variety of ideas that enter into men’s discourses and reasonings. But
this hinders not but that when any one uses any term, he may have in
his mind a determined idea, which he makes it the sign of, and to which
he should keep it steadily annexed during that present discourse. Where
he does not, or cannot do this, he in vain pretends to clear or
distinct ideas: it is plain his are not so; and therefore there can be
expected nothing but obscurity and confusion, where such terms are made
use of which have not such a precise determination.

Upon this ground I have thought determined ideas a way of speaking less
liable to mistakes, than clear and distinct: and where men have got
such determined ideas of all that they reason, inquire, or argue about,
they will find a great part of their doubts and disputes at an end; the
greatest part of the questions and controversies that perplex mankind
depending on the doubtful and uncertain use of words, or (which is the
same) indetermined ideas, which they are made to stand for. I have made
choice of these terms to signify, (1) Some immediate object of the
mind, which it perceives and has before it, distinct from the sound it
uses as a sign of it. (2) That this idea, thus determined, i.e. which
the mind has in itself, and knows, and sees there, be determined
without any change to that name, and that name determined to that
precise idea. If men had such determined ideas in their inquiries and
discourses, they would both discern how far their own inquiries and
discourses went, and avoid the greatest part of the disputes and
wranglings they have with others.

Besides this, the bookseller will think it necessary I should advertise
the reader that there is an addition of two chapters wholly new; the
one of the Association of Ideas, the other of Enthusiasm. These, with
some other larger additions never before printed, he has engaged to
print by themselves, after the same manner, and for the same purpose,
as was done when this Essay had the second impression.

In the Sixth Edition there is very little added or altered. The
greatest part of what is new is contained in the twenty-first chapter
of the second book, which any one, if he thinks it worth while, may,
with a very little labour, transcribe into the margin of the former
edition.




ESSAY CONCERNING HUMANE UNDERSTANDING.




BOOK I
NEITHER PRINCIPLES NOR IDEAS ARE INNATE




CHAPTER I.
INTRODUCTION.


1. An Inquiry into the Understanding pleasant and useful.

Since it is the UNDERSTANDING that sets man above the rest of sensible
beings, and gives him all the advantage and dominion which he has over
them; it is certainly a subject, even for its nobleness, worth our
labour to inquire into. The understanding, like the eye, whilst it
makes us see and perceive all other things, takes no notice of itself;
and it requires and art and pains to set it at a distance and make it
its own object. But whatever be the difficulties that lie in the way of
this inquiry; whatever it be that keeps us so much in the dark to
ourselves; sure I am that all the light we can let in upon our minds,
all the acquaintance we can make with our own understandings, will not
only be very pleasant, but bring us great advantage, in directing our
thoughts in the search of other things.

2. Design.

This, therefore, being my purpose—to inquire into the original,
certainty, and extent of HUMAN KNOWLEDGE, together with the grounds and
degrees of BELIEF, OPINION, and ASSENT;—I shall not at present meddle
with the physical consideration of the mind; or trouble myself to
examine wherein its essence consists; or by what motions of our spirits
or alterations of our bodies we come to have any SENSATION by our
organs, or any IDEAS in our understandings; and whether those ideas do
in their formation, any or all of them, depend on matter or not. These
are speculations which, however curious and entertaining, I shall
decline, as lying out of my way in the design I am now upon. It shall
suffice to my present purpose, to consider the discerning faculties of
a man, as they are employed about the objects which they have to do
with. And I shall imagine I have not wholly misemployed myself in the
thoughts I shall have on this occasion, if, in this historical, plain
method, I can give any account of the ways whereby our understandings
come to attain those notions of things we have; and can set down any
measures of the certainty of our knowledge; or the grounds of those
persuasions which are to be found amongst men, so various, different,
and wholly contradictory; and yet asserted somewhere or other with such
assurance and confidence, that he that shall take a view of the
opinions of mankind, observe their opposition, and at the same time
consider the fondness and devotion wherewith they are embraced, the
resolution and eagerness wherewith they are maintained, may perhaps
have reason to suspect, that either there is no such thing as truth at
all, or that mankind hath no sufficient means to attain a certain
knowledge of it.

3. Method.

It is therefore worth while to search out the bounds between opinion
and knowledge; and examine by what measures, in things whereof we have
no certain knowledge, we ought to regulate our assent and moderate our
persuasion. In order whereunto I shall pursue this following method:—
First, I shall inquire into the original of those ideas, notions, or
whatever else you please to call them, which a man observes, and is
conscious to himself he has in his mind; and the ways whereby the
understanding comes to be furnished with them.

Secondly, I shall endeavour to show what knowledge the understanding
hath by those ideas; and the certainty, evidence, and extent of it.

Thirdly, I shall make some inquiry into the nature and grounds of FAITH
or OPINION: whereby I mean that assent which we give to any proposition
as true, of whose truth yet we have no certain knowledge. And here we
shall have occasion to examine the reasons and degrees of ASSENT.

4. Useful to know the Extent of our Comprehension.

If by this inquiry into the nature of the understanding, I can discover
the powers thereof; how far they reach; to what things they are in any
degree proportionate; and where they fail us, I suppose it may be of
use to prevail with the busy mind of man to be more cautious in
meddling with things exceeding its comprehension; to stop when it is at
the utmost extent of its tether; and to sit down in a quiet ignorance
of those things which, upon examination, are found to be beyond the
reach of our capacities. We should not then perhaps be so forward, out
of an affectation of an universal knowledge, to raise questions, and
perplex ourselves and others with disputes about things to which our
understandings are not suited; and of which we cannot frame in our
minds any clear or distinct perceptions, or whereof (as it has perhaps
too often happened) we have not any notions at all. If we can find out
how far the understanding can extend its view; how far it has faculties
to attain certainty; and in what cases it can only judge and guess, we
may learn to content ourselves with what is attainable by us in this
state.

5. Our Capacity suited to our State and Concerns.

For though the comprehension of our understandings comes exceeding
short of the vast extent of things, yet we shall have cause enough to
magnify the bountiful Author of our being, for that proportion and
degree of knowledge he has bestowed on us, so far above all the rest of
the inhabitants of this our mansion. Men have reason to be well
satisfied with what God hath thought fit for them, since he hath given
them (as St. Peter says) [words in Greek], whatsoever is necessary for
the conveniences of life and information of virtue; and has put within
the reach of their discovery, the comfortable provision for this life,
and the way that leads to a better. How short soever their knowledge
may come of an universal or perfect comprehension of whatsoever is, it
yet secures their great concernments, that they have light enough to
lead them to the knowledge of their Maker, and the sight of their own
duties. Men may find matter sufficient to busy their heads, and employ
their hands with variety, delight, and satisfaction, if they will not
boldly quarrel with their own constitution, and throw away the
blessings their hands are filled with, because they are not big enough
to grasp everything. We shall not have much reason to complain of the
narrowness of our minds, if we will but employ them about what may be
of use to us; for of that they are very capable. And it will be an
unpardonable, as well as childish peevishness, if we undervalue the
advantages of our knowledge, and neglect to improve it to the ends for
which it was given us, because there are some things that are set out
of the reach of it. It will be no excuse to an idle and untoward
servant, who would not attend his business by candle light, to plead
that he had not broad sunshine. The Candle that is set up in us shines
bright enough for all our purposes. The discoveries we can make with
this ought to satisfy us; and we shall then use our understandings
right, when we entertain all objects in that way and proportion that
they are suited to our faculties, and upon those grounds they are
capable of being proposed to us; and not peremptorily or intemperately
require demonstration, and demand certainty, where probability only is
to be had, and which is sufficient to govern all our concernments. If
we will disbelieve everything, because we cannot certainly know all
things, we shall do much—what as wisely as he who would not use his
legs, but sit still and perish, because he had no wings to fly.

6. Knowledge of our Capacity a Cure of Scepticism and Idleness.

When we know our own strength, we shall the better know what to
undertake with hopes of success; and when we have well surveyed the
POWERS of our own minds, and made some estimate what we may expect from
them, we shall not be inclined either to sit still, and not set our
thoughts on work at all, in despair of knowing anything; nor on the
other side, question everything, and disclaim all knowledge, because
some things are not to be understood. It is of great use to the sailor
to know the length of his line, though he cannot with it fathom all the
depths of the ocean. It is well he knows that it is long enough to
reach the bottom, at such places as are necessary to direct his voyage,
and caution him against running upon shoals that may ruin him. Our
business here is not to know all things, but those which concern our
conduct. If we can find out those measures, whereby a rational
creature, put in that state in which man is in this world, may and
ought to govern his opinions, and actions depending thereon, we need
not to be troubled that some other things escape our knowledge.

7. Occasion of this Essay.

This was that which gave the first rise to this Essay concerning the
understanding. For I thought that the first step towards satisfying
several inquiries the mind of man was very apt to run into, was, to
take a survey of our own understandings, examine our own powers, and
see to what things they were adapted. Till that was done I suspected we
began at the wrong end, and in vain sought for satisfaction in a quiet
and sure possession of truths that most concerned us, whilst we let
loose our thoughts into the vast ocean of Being; as if all that
boundless extent were the natural and undoubted possession of our
understandings, wherein there was nothing exempt from its decisions, or
that escaped its comprehension. Thus men, extending their inquiries
beyond their capacities, and letting their thoughts wander into those
depths where they can find no sure footing, it is no wonder that they
raise questions and multiply disputes, which, never coming to any clear
resolution, are proper only to continue and increase their doubts, and
to confirm them at last in perfect scepticism. Whereas, were the
capacities of our understandings well considered, the extent of our
knowledge once discovered, and the horizon found which sets the bounds
between the enlightened and dark parts of things; between what is and
what is not comprehensible by us, men would perhaps with less scruple
acquiesce in the avowed ignorance of the one, and employ their thoughts
and discourse with more advantage and satisfaction in the other.

8. What Idea stands for.

Thus much I thought necessary to say concerning the occasion of this
inquiry into human Understanding. But, before I proceed on to what I
have thought on this subject, I must here in the entrance beg pardon of
my reader for the frequent use of the word IDEA, which he will find in
the following treatise. It being that term which, I think, serves best
to stand for whatsoever is the OBJECT of the understanding when a man
thinks, I have used it to express whatever is meant by PHANTASM,
NOTION, SPECIES, or WHATEVER IT IS WHICH THE MIND CAN BE EMPLOYED ABOUT
IN THINKING; and I could not avoid frequently using it. I presume it
will be easily granted me, that there are such IDEAS in men’s minds:
every one is conscious of them in himself; and men’s words and actions
will satisfy him that they are in others.

Our first inquiry then shall be,—how they come into the mind.




CHAPTER II.
NO INNATE SPECULATIVE PRINCIPLES.


1. The way shown how we come by any Knowledge, sufficient to prove it
not innate.

It is an established opinion amongst some men, that there are in the
understanding certain INNATE PRINCIPLES; some primary notions, Κοινὰι
εὔνοιαι, characters, as it were stamped upon the mind of man; which the
soul receives in its very first being, and brings into the world with
it. It would be sufficient to convince unprejudiced readers of the
falseness of this supposition, if I should only show (as I hope I shall
in the following parts of this Discourse) how men, barely by the use of
their natural faculties may attain to all the knowledge they have,
without the help of any innate impressions; and may arrive at
certainty, without any such original notions or principles. For I
imagine any one will easily grant that it would be impertinent to
suppose the ideas of colours innate in a creature to whom God hath
given sight, and a power to receive them by the eyes from external
objects: and no less unreasonable would it be to attribute several
truths to the impressions of nature, and innate characters, when we may
observe in ourselves faculties fit to attain as easy and certain
knowledge of them as if they were originally imprinted on the mind.

But because a man is not permitted without censure to follow his own
thoughts in the search of truth, when they lead him ever so little out
of the common road, I shall set down the reasons that made me doubt of
the truth of that opinion, as an excuse for my mistake, if I be in one;
which I leave to be considered by those who, with me, dispose
themselves to embrace truth wherever they find it.

2. General Assent the great Argument.

There is nothing more commonly taken for granted than that there are
certain PRINCIPLES, both SPECULATIVE and PRACTICAL, (for they speak of
both), universally agreed upon by all mankind: which therefore, they
argue, must needs be the constant impressions which the souls of men
receive in their first beings, and which they bring into the world with
them, as necessarily and really as they do any of their inherent
faculties.

3. Universal Consent proves nothing innate.

This argument, drawn from universal consent, has this misfortune in it,
that if it were true in matter of fact, that there were certain truths
wherein all mankind agreed, it would not prove them innate, if there
can be any other way shown how men may come to that universal
agreement, in the things they do consent in, which I presume may be
done.

4. “What is is,” and “It is possible for the same Thing to be and not
to be,” not universally assented to.

But, which is worse, this argument of universal consent, which is made
use of to prove innate principles, seems to me a demonstration that
there are none such: because there are none to which all mankind give
an universal assent. I shall begin with the speculative, and instance
in those magnified principles of demonstration, “Whatsoever is, is,”
and “It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be”; which,
of all others, I think have the most allowed title to innate. These
have so settled a reputation of maxims universally received, that it
will no doubt be thought strange if any one should seem to question it.
But yet I take liberty to say, that these propositions are so far from
having an universal assent, that there are a great part of mankind to
whom they are not so much as known.

5. Not on Mind naturally imprinted, because not known to Children,
Idiots, &c.

For, first, it is evident, that all children and idiots have not the
least apprehension or thought of them. And the want of that is enough
to destroy that universal assent which must needs be the necessary
concomitant of all innate truths: it seeming to me near a contradiction
to say, that there are truths imprinted on the soul, which it perceives
or understands not: imprinting, if it signify anything, being nothing
else but the making certain truths to be perceived. For to imprint
anything on the mind without the mind’s perceiving it, seems to me
hardly intelligible. If therefore children and idiots have souls, have
minds, with those impressions upon them, THEY must unavoidably perceive
them, and necessarily know and assent to these truths; which since they
do not, it is evident that there are no such impressions. For if they
are not notions naturally imprinted, how can they be innate? and if
they are notions imprinted, how can they be unknown? To say a notion is
imprinted on the mind, and yet at the same time to say, that the mind
is ignorant of it, and never yet took notice of it, is to make this
impression nothing. No proposition can be said to be in the mind which
it never yet knew, which it was never yet conscious of. For if any one
may, then, by the same reason, all propositions that are true, and the
mind is capable ever of assenting to, may be said to be in the mind,
and to be imprinted: since, if any one can be said to be in the mind,
which it never yet knew, it must be only because it is capable of
knowing it; and so the mind is of all truths it ever shall know. Nay,
thus truths may be imprinted on the mind which it never did, nor ever
shall know; for a man may live long, and die at last in ignorance of
many truths which his mind was capable of knowing, and that with
certainty. So that if the capacity of knowing be the natural impression
contended for, all the truths a man ever comes to know will, by this
account, be every one of them innate; and this great point will amount
to no more, but only to a very improper way of speaking; which, whilst
it pretends to assert the contrary, says nothing different from those
who deny innate principles. For nobody, I think, ever denied that the
mind was capable of knowing several truths. The capacity, they say, is
innate; the knowledge acquired. But then to what end such contest for
certain innate maxims? If truths can be imprinted on the understanding
without being perceived, I can see no difference there can be between
any truths the mind is CAPABLE of knowing in respect of their original:
they must all be innate or all adventitious: in vain shall a man go
about to distinguish them. He therefore that talks of innate notions in
the understanding, cannot (if he intend thereby any distinct sort of
truths) mean such truths to be in the understanding as it never
perceived, and is yet wholly ignorant of. For if these words “to be in
the understanding” have any propriety, they signify to be understood.
So that to be in the understanding, and not to be understood; to be in
the mind and never to be perceived, is all one as to say anything is
and is not in the mind or understanding. If therefore these two
propositions, “Whatsoever is, is,” and “It is impossible for the same
thing to be and not to be,” are by nature imprinted, children cannot be
ignorant of them: infants, and all that have souls, must necessarily
have them in their understandings, know the truth of them, and assent
to it.

6. That men know them when they come to the Use of Reason answered.

To avoid this, it is usually answered, that all men know and assent to
them, WHEN THEY COME TO THE USE OF REASON; and this is enough to prove
them innate. I answer:

7. Doubtful expressions, that have scarce any signification, go for
clear reasons to those who, being prepossessed, take not the pains to
examine even what they themselves say. For, to apply this answer with
any tolerable sense to our present purpose, it must signify one of
these two things: either that as soon as men come to the use of reason
these supposed native inscriptions come to be known and observed by
them; or else, that the use and exercise of men’s reason, assists them
in the discovery of these principles, and certainly makes them known to
them.

8. If Reason discovered them, that would not prove them innate.

If they mean, that by the use of reason men may discover these
principles, and that this is sufficient to prove them innate; their way
of arguing will stand thus, viz. that whatever truths reason can
certainly discover to us, and make us firmly assent to, those are all
naturally imprinted on the mind; since that universal assent, which is
made the mark of them, amounts to no more but this,—that by the use of
reason we are capable to come to a certain knowledge of and assent to
them; and, by this means, there will be no difference between the
maxims of the mathematicians, and theorems they deduce from them: all
must be equally allowed innate; they being all discoveries made by the
use of reason, and truths that a rational creature may certainly come
to know, if he apply his thoughts rightly that way.

9. It is false that Reason discovers them.

But how can these men think the use of reason necessary to discover
principles that are supposed innate, when reason (if we may believe
them) is nothing else but the faculty of deducing unknown truths from
principles or propositions that are already known? That certainly can
never be thought innate which we have need of reason to discover;
unless, as I have said, we will have all the certain truths that reason
ever teaches us, to be innate. We may as well think the use of reason
necessary to make our eyes discover visible objects, as that there
should be need of reason, or the exercise thereof, to make the
understanding see what is originally engraven on it, and cannot be in
the understanding before it be perceived by it. So that to make reason
discover those truths thus imprinted, is to say, that the use of reason
discovers to a man what he knew before: and if men have those innate
impressed truths originally, and before the use of reason, and yet are
always ignorant of them till they come to the use of reason, it is in
effect to say, that men know and know them not at the same time.

10. No use made of reasoning in the discovery of these two maxims.

It will here perhaps be said that mathematical demonstrations, and
other truths that are not innate, are not assented to as soon as
proposed, wherein they are distinguished from these maxims and other
innate truths. I shall have occasion to speak of assent upon the first
proposing, more particularly by and by. I shall here only, and that
very readily, allow, that these maxims and mathematical demonstrations
are in this different: that the one have need of reason, using of
proofs, to make them out and to gain our assent; but the other, as soon
as understood, are, without any the least reasoning, embraced and
assented to. But I withal beg leave to observe, that it lays open the
weakness of this subterfuge, which requires the use of reason for the
discovery of these general truths: since it must be confessed that in
their discovery there is no use made of reasoning at all. And I think
those who give this answer will not be forward to affirm that the
knowledge of this maxim, “That it is impossible for the same thing to
be and not to be,” is a deduction of our reason. For this would be to
destroy that bounty of nature they seem so fond of, whilst they make
the knowledge of those principles to depend on the labour of our
thoughts. For all reasoning is search, and casting about, and requires
pains and application. And how can it with any tolerable sense be
supposed, that what was imprinted by nature, as the foundation and
guide of our reason, should need the use of reason to discover it?

11. And if there were this would prove them not innate.

Those who will take the pains to reflect with a little attention on the
operations of the understanding, will find that this ready assent of
the mind to some truths, depends not, either on native inscription, or
the use of reason, but on a faculty of the mind quite distinct from
both of them, as we shall see hereafter. Reason, therefore, having
nothing to do in procuring our assent to these maxims, if by saying,
that “men know and assent to them, when they come to the use of
reason,” be meant, that the use of reason assists us in the knowledge
of these maxims, it is utterly false; and were it true, would prove
them not to be innate.

12. The coming of the Use of Reason not the Time we come to know these
Maxims.

If by knowing and assenting to them “when we come to the use of
reason,” be meant, that this is the time when they come to be taken
notice of by the mind; and that as soon as children come to the use of
reason, they come also to know and assent to these maxims; this also is
false and frivolous. First, it is false; because it is evident these
maxims are not in the mind so early as the use of reason; and therefore
the coming to the use of reason is falsely assigned as the time of
their discovery. How many instances of the use of reason may we observe
in children, a long time before they have any knowledge of this maxim,
“That it is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be?” And a
great part of illiterate people and savages pass many years, even of
their rational age, without ever thinking on this and the like general
propositions. I grant, men come not to the knowledge of these general
and more abstract truths, which are thought innate, till they come to
the use of reason; and I add, nor then neither. Which is so, because,
till after they come to the use of reason, those general abstract ideas
are not framed in the mind, about which those general maxims are, which
are mistaken for innate principles, but are indeed discoveries made and
verities introduced and brought into the mind by the same way, and
discovered by the same steps, as several other propositions, which
nobody was ever so extravagant as to suppose innate. This I hope to
make plain in the sequel of this Discourse. I allow therefore, a
necessity that men should come to the use of reason before they get the
knowledge of those general truths; but deny that men’s coming to the
use of reason is the time of their discovery.

13. By this they are not distinguished from other knowable Truths.

In the mean time it is observable, that this saying that men know and
assent to these maxims “when they come to the use of reason,” amounts
in reality of fact to no more but this,—that they are never known nor
taken notice of before the use of reason, but may possibly be assented
to some time after, during a man’s life; but when is uncertain. And so
may all other knowable truths, as well as these which therefore have no
advantage nor distinction from other by this note of being known when
we come to the use of reason; nor are thereby proved to be innate, but
quite the contrary.

14. If coming to the Use of Reason were the Time of their Discovery, it
would not prove them innate.

But, secondly, were it true that the precise time of their being known
and assented to were, when men come to the use of reason; neither would
that prove them innate. This way of arguing is as frivolous as the
supposition itself is false. For, by what kind of logic will it appear
that any notion is originally by nature imprinted in the mind in its
first constitution, because it comes first to be observed and assented
to when a faculty of the mind, which has quite a distinct province,
begins to exert itself? And therefore the coming to the use of speech,
if it were supposed the time that these maxims are first assented to,
(which it may be with as much truth as the time when men come to the
use of reason,) would be as good a proof that they were innate, as to
say they are innate because men assent to them when they come to the
use of reason. I agree then with these men of innate principles, that
there is no knowledge of these general and self-evident maxims in the
mind, till it comes to the exercise of reason: but I deny that the
coming to the use of reason is the precise time when they are first
taken notice of; and if that were the precise time, I deny that it
would prove them innate. All that can with any truth be meant by this
proposition, that men ‘assent to them when they come to the use of
reason,’ is no more but this,—that the making of general abstract
ideas, and the understanding of general names, being a concomitant of
the rational faculty, and growing up with it, children commonly get not
those general ideas, nor learn the names that stand for them, till,
having for a good while exercised their reason about familiar and more
particular ideas, they are, by their ordinary discourse and actions
with others, acknowledged to be capable of rational conversation. If
assenting to these maxims, when men come to the use of reason, can be
true in any other sense, I desire it may be shown; or at least, how in
this, or any other sense, it proves them innate.

15. The Steps by which the Mind attains several Truths.

The senses at first let in PARTICULAR ideas, and furnish the yet empty
cabinet, and the mind by degrees growing familiar with some of them,
they are lodged in the memory, and names got to them. Afterwards, the
mind proceeding further, abstracts them, and by degrees learns the use
of general names. In this manner the mind comes to be furnished with
ideas and language, the MATERIALS about which to exercise its
discursive faculty. And the use of reason becomes daily more visible,
as these materials that give it employment increase. But though the
having of general ideas and the use of general words and reason usually
grow together, yet I see not how this any way proves them innate. The
knowledge of some truths, I confess, is very early in the mind; but in
a way that shows them not to be innate. For, if we will observe, we
shall find it still to be about ideas, not innate, but acquired; it
being about those first which are imprinted by external things, with
which infants have earliest to do, which make the most frequent
impressions on their senses. In ideas thus got, the mind discovers that
some agree and others differ, probably as soon as it has any use of
memory; as soon as it is able to retain and perceive distinct ideas.
But whether it be then or no, this is certain, it does so long before
it has the use of words; or comes to that which we commonly call “the
use of reason.” For a child knows as certainly before it can speak the
difference between the ideas of sweet and bitter (i.e. that sweet is
not bitter), as it knows afterwards (when it comes to speak) that
wormwood and sugarplums are not the same thing.

16. Assent to supposed innate truths depends on having clear and
distinct ideas of what their terms mean, and not on their innateness.

A child knows not that three and four are equal to seven, till he comes
to be able to count seven, and has got the name and idea of equality;
and then, upon explaining those words, he presently assents to, or
rather perceives the truth of that proposition. But neither does he
then readily assent because it is an innate truth, nor was his assent
wanting till then because he wanted the use of reason; but the truth of
it appears to him as soon as he has settled in his mind the clear and
distinct ideas that these names stand for. And then he knows the truth
of that proposition upon the same ground and by the same means, that he
knew before that a rod and a cherry are not the same thing; and upon
the same ground also that he may come to know afterwards “That it is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be,” as shall be more
fully shown hereafter. So that the later it is before any one comes to
have those general ideas about which those maxims are; or to know the
signification of those generic terms that stand for them; or to put
together in his mind the ideas they stand for; the later also will it
be before he comes to assent to those maxims;—whose terms, with the
ideas they stand for, being no more innate than those of a cat or a
weasel he must stay till time and observation have acquainted him with
them; and then he will be in a capacity to know the truth of these
maxims, upon the first occasion that shall make him put together those
ideas in his mind, and observe whether they agree or disagree,
according as is expressed in those propositions. And therefore it is
that a man knows that eighteen and nineteen are equal to thirty-seven,
by the same self-evidence that he knows one and two to be equal to
three: yet a child knows this not so soon as the other; not for want of
the use of reason, but because the ideas the words eighteen nineteen,
and thirty-seven stand for, are not so soon got, as those which are
signified by one, two, and three.

17. Assenting as soon as proposed and understood, proves them not
innate.

This evasion therefore of general assent when men come to the use of
reason, failing as it does, and leaving no difference between those
supposed innate and other truths that are afterwards acquired and
learnt, men have endeavoured to secure an universal assent to those
they call maxims, by saying, they are generally assented to as soon as
proposed, and the terms they are proposed in understood: seeing all
men, even children, as soon as they hear and understand the terms,
assent to these propositions, they think it is sufficient to prove them
innate. For, since men never fail after they have once understood the
words, to acknowledge them for undoubted truths, they would infer, that
certainly these propositions were first lodged in the understanding,
which, without any teaching, the mind, at the very first proposal
immediately closes with and assents to, and after that never doubts
again.

18. If such an Assent be a Mark of Innate, then “that one and two are
equal to three, that Sweetness is not Bitterness,” and a thousand the
like, must be innate.

In answer to this, I demand whether ready assent given to a
proposition, upon first hearing and understanding the terms, be a
certain mark of an innate principle? If it be not, such a general
assent is in vain urged as a proof of them: if it be said that it is a
mark of innate, they must then allow all such propositions to be innate
which are generally assented to as soon as heard, whereby they will
find themselves plentifully stored with innate principles. For upon the
same ground, viz. of assent at first hearing and understanding the
terms, that men would have those maxims pass for innate, they must also
admit several propositions about numbers to be innate; and thus, that
one and two are equal to three, that two and two are equal to four, and
a multitude of other the like propositions in numbers, that everybody
assents to at first hearing and understanding the terms, must have a
place amongst these innate axioms. Nor is this the prerogative of
numbers alone, and propositions made about several of them; but even
natural philosophy, and all the other sciences, afford propositions
which are sure to meet with assent as soon as they are understood. That
“two bodies cannot be in the same place” is a truth that nobody any
more sticks at than at these maxims, that “it is impossible for the
same thing to be and not to be,” that “white is not black,” that “a
square is not a circle,” that “bitterness is not sweetness.” These and
a million of such other propositions, as many at least as we have
distinct ideas of, every man in his wits, at first hearing, and
knowing, what the names stand for, must necessarily assent to. If these
men will be true to their own rule, and have assent at first hearing
and understanding the terms to be a mark of innate, they must allow not
only as many innate propositions, as men have distinct ideas; but as
many as men can make propositions wherein, different ideas are denied
one of another. Since every proposition wherein one different idea is
denied of another, will as certainly find assent at first hearing and
understanding the terms as this general one, “It is impossible for the
same thing to be and not to be,” or that which is the foundation of it
and is the easier understood of the two, “The same is not different”;
by which account they will have legions of innate propositions of this
one sort, without mentioning any other. But, since no proposition can
be innate unless the _ideas_ about which it is be innate, this will be
to suppose all our ideas of colours, sounds, tastes, figure, &c.,
innate, than which there cannot be anything more opposite to reason and
experience. Universal and ready assent upon hearing and understanding
the terms is, I grant, a mark of self-evidence; but self-evidence,
depending not on innate impressions, but on something else, (as we
shall show hereafter,) belongs to several propositions which nobody was
yet so extravagant as to pretend to be innate.

19. Such less general Propositions known before these universal Maxims.

Nor let it be said, that those more particular self-evident
propositions, which are assented to at first hearing, as that “one and
two are equal to three,” that “green is not red,” &c., are received as
the consequences of those more universal propositions which are looked
on as innate principles; since any one, who will but take the pains to
observe what passes in the understanding, will certainly find that
these, and the like less general propositions, are certainly known, and
firmly assented to by those who are utterly ignorant of those more
general maxims; and so, being earlier in the mind than those (as they
are called) first principles, cannot owe to them the assent wherewith
they are received at first hearing.

20. One and one equal to Two, &c., not general nor useful answered.

If it be said, that these propositions, viz. “two and two are equal to
four,” “red is not blue,” &c., are not general maxims nor of any great
use, I answer, that makes nothing to the argument of universal assent
upon hearing and understanding. For, if that be the certain mark of
innate, whatever propositions can be found that receives general assent
as soon as heard understood, that must be admitted for an innate
proposition as well as this maxim, “That it is impossible for the same
thing to be and not to be,” they being upon this ground equal. And as
to the difference of being more general, that makes this maxim more
remote from being innate; those general and abstract ideas being more
strangers to our first apprehensions than those of more particular
self-evident propositions; and therefore it is longer before they are
admitted, and assented to by the growing understanding. And as to the
usefulness of these magnified maxims, that perhaps will not be found so
great as is generally conceived, when it comes in its due place to be
more fully considered.

21. These Maxims not being known sometimes till proposed, proves them
not innate.

But we have not yet done with “assenting to propositions at first
hearing and understanding their terms.” It is fit we first take notice
that this, instead of being a mark that they are innate, is a proof of
the contrary; since it supposes that several, who understand and know
other things, are ignorant of these principles till they are proposed
to them; and that one may be unacquainted with these truths till he
hears them from others. For, if they were innate, what need they be
proposed in order to gaining assent, when, by being in the
understanding, by a natural and original impression, (if there were any
such,) they could not but be known before? Or doth the proposing them
print them clearer in the mind than nature did? If so, then the
consequence will be, that a man knows them better after he has been
thus taught them than he did before. Whence it will follow that these
principles may be made more evident to us by others’ teaching than
nature has made them by impression: which will ill agree with the
opinion of innate principles, and give but little authority to them;
but, on the contrary, makes them unfit to be the foundations of all our
other knowledge; as they are pretended to be. This cannot be denied,
that men grow first acquainted with many of these self-evident truths
upon their being proposed: but it is clear that whosoever does so,
finds in himself that he then begins to know a proposition, which he
knew not before, and which from thenceforth he never questions; not
because it was innate, but because the consideration of the nature of
the things contained in those words would not suffer him to think
otherwise, how, or whensoever he is brought to reflect on them. And if
whatever is assented to at first hearing and understanding the terms
must pass for an innate principle, every well-grounded observation,
drawn from particulars into a general rule, must be innate. When yet it
is certain that not all, but only sagacious heads, light at first on
these observations, and reduce them into general propositions: not
innate but collected from a preceding acquaintance and reflection on
particular instances. These, when observing men have made them,
unobserving men, when they are proposed to them cannot refuse their
assent to.

22. Implicitly known before proposing, signifies that the Mind is
capable of understanding them, or else signifies nothing.

If it be said, the understanding hath an IMPLICIT knowledge of these
principles, but not an EXPLICIT, before this first hearing (as they
must who will say “that they are in the understanding before they are
known,”) it will be hard to conceive what is meant by a principle
imprinted on the understanding implicitly, unless it be this,—that the
mind is capable of understanding and assenting firmly to such
propositions. And thus all mathematical demonstrations, as well as
first principles, must be received as native impressions on the mind;
which I fear they will scarce allow them to be, who find it harder to
demonstrate a proposition than assent to it when demonstrated. And few
mathematicians will be forward to believe, that all the diagrams they
have drawn were but copies of those innate characters which nature had
engraven upon their minds.

23. The Argument of assenting on first hearing, is upon a false
supposition of no precedent teaching.

There is, I fear, this further weakness in the foregoing argument,
which would persuade us that therefore those maxims are to be thought
innate, which men admit at first hearing; because they assent to
propositions which they are not taught, nor do receive from the force
of any argument or demonstration, but a bare explication or
understanding of the terms. Under which there seems to me to lie this
fallacy, that men are supposed not to be taught nor to learn anything
_de novo;_ when, in truth, they are taught, and do learn something they
were ignorant of before. For, first, it is evident that they have
learned the terms, and their signification; neither of which was born
with them. But this is not all the acquired knowledge in the case: the
ideas themselves, about which the proposition is, are not born with
them, no more than their names, but got afterwards. So that in all
propositions that are assented to at first hearing, the terms of the
proposition, their standing for such ideas, and the ideas themselves
that they stand for, being neither of them innate, I would fain know
what there is remaining in such propositions that is innate. For I
would gladly have any one name that proposition whose terms or ideas
were either of them innate. We by degrees get ideas and names, and
learn their appropriated connexion one with another; and then to
propositions made in such terms, whose signification we have learnt,
and wherein the agreement or disagreement we can perceive in our ideas
when put together is expressed, we at first hearing assent; though to
other propositions, in themselves as certain and evident, but which are
concerning ideas not so soon or so easily got, we are at the same time
no way capable of assenting. For, though a child quickly assents to
this proposition, “That an apple is not fire,” when by familiar
acquaintance he has got the ideas of those two different things
distinctly imprinted on his mind, and has learnt that the names apple
and fire stand for them; yet it will be some years after, perhaps,
before the same child will assent to this proposition, “That it is
impossible for the same thing to be and not to be”; because that,
though perhaps the words are as easy to be learnt, yet the
signification of them being more large, comprehensive, and abstract
than of the names annexed to those sensible things the child hath to do
with, it is longer before he learns their precise meaning, and it
requires more time plainly to form in his mind those general ideas they
stand for. Till that be done, you will in vain endeavour to make any
child assent to a proposition made up of such general terms; but as
soon as ever he has got those ideas, and learned their names, he
forwardly closes with the one as well as the other of the forementioned
propositions: and with both for the same reason; viz. because he finds
the ideas he has in his mind to agree or disagree, according as the
words standing for them are affirmed or denied one of another in the
proposition. But if propositions be brought to him in words which stand
for ideas he has not yet in his mind, to such propositions, however
evidently true or false in themselves, he affords neither assent nor
dissent, but is ignorant. For words being but empty sounds, any further
than they are signs of our ideas, we cannot but assent to them as they
correspond to those ideas we have, but no further than that. But the
showing by what steps and ways knowledge comes into our minds; and the
grounds of several degrees of assent, being; the business of the
following Discourse, it may suffice to have only touched on it here, as
one reason that made me doubt of those innate principles.

24. Not innate because not universally assented to.

To conclude this argument of universal consent, I agree with these
defenders of innate principles,—that if they are innate, they must
needs have universal assent. For that a truth should be innate and yet
not assented to, is to me as unintelligible as for a man to know a
truth and be ignorant of it at the same time. But then, by these men’s
own confession, they cannot be innate; since they are not assented to
by those who understand not the terms; nor by a great part of those who
do understand them, but have yet never heard nor thought of those
propositions; which, I think, is at least one half of mankind. But were
the number far less, it would be enough to destroy universal assent,
and thereby show these propositions not to be innate, if children alone
were ignorant of them.

25. These Maxims not the first known.

But that I may not be accused to argue from the thoughts of infants,
which are unknown to us, and to conclude from what passes in their
understandings before they express it; I say next, that these two
general propositions are not the truths that first possess the minds of
children, nor are antecedent to all acquired and adventitious notions:
which, if they were innate, they must needs be. Whether we can
determine it or no, it matters not, there is certainly a time when
children begin to think, and their words and actions do assure us that
they do so. When therefore they are capable of thought, of knowledge,
of assent, can it rationally be supposed they can be ignorant of those
notions that nature has imprinted, were there any such? Can it be
imagined, with any appearance of reason, that they perceive the
impressions from things without, and be at the same time ignorant of
those characters which nature itself has taken care to stamp within?
Can they receive and assent to adventitious notions, and be ignorant of
those which are supposed woven into the very principles of their being,
and imprinted there in indelible characters, to be the foundation and
guide of all their acquired knowledge and future reasonings? This would
be to make nature take pains to no purpose; or at least to write very
ill; since its characters could not be read by those eyes which saw
other things very well: and those are very ill supposed the clearest
parts of truth, and the foundations of all our knowledge, which are not
first known, and without which the undoubted knowledge of several other
things may be had. The child certainly knows, that the nurse that feeds
it is neither the cat it plays with, nor the blackmoor it is afraid of:
that the wormseed or mustard it refuses, is not the apple or sugar it
cries for: this it is certainly and undoubtedly assured of: but will
any one say, it is by virtue of this principle, “That it is impossible
for the same thing to be and not to be,” that it so firmly assents to
these and other parts of its knowledge? Or that the child has any
notion or apprehension of that proposition at an age, wherein yet, it
is plain, it knows a great many other truths? He that will say,
children join in these general abstract speculations with their
sucking-bottles and their rattles, may perhaps, with justice, be
thought to have more passion and zeal for his opinion, but less
sincerity and truth, than one of that age.

26. And so not innate.

Though therefore there be several general propositions that meet with
constant and ready assent, as soon as proposed to men grown up, who
have attained the use of more general and abstract ideas, and names
standing for them; yet they not being to be found in those of tender
years, who nevertheless know other things, they cannot pretend to
universal assent of intelligent persons, and so by no means can be
supposed innate;—it being impossible that any truth which is innate (if
there were any such) should be unknown, at least to any one who knows
anything else. Since, if they are innate truths, they must be innate
thoughts: there being nothing a truth in the mind that it has never
thought on. Whereby it is evident, if there be any innate truths, they
must necessarily be the first of any thought on; the first that appear.

27. Not innate, because they appear least, where what is innate shows
itself clearest.

That the general maxims we are discoursing of are not known to
children, idiots, and a great part of mankind, we have already
sufficiently proved: whereby it is evident they have not an universal
assent, nor are general impressions. But there is this further argument
in it against their being innate: that these characters, if they were
native and original impressions, should appear fairest and clearest in
those persons in whom yet we find no footsteps of them; and it is, in
my opinion, a strong presumption that they are not innate, since they
are least known to those in whom, if they were innate, they must needs
exert themselves with most force and vigour. For children, idiots,
savages, and illiterate people, being of all others the least corrupted
by custom, or borrowed opinions; learning and education having not cast
their native thoughts into new moulds; nor by superinducing foreign and
studied doctrines, confounded those fair characters nature had written
there; one might reasonably imagine that in THEIR minds these innate
notions should lie open fairly to every one’s view, as it is certain
the thoughts of children do. It might very well be expected that these
principles should be perfectly known to naturals; which being stamped
immediately on the soul, (as these men suppose,) can have no dependence
on the constitution or organs of the body, the only confessed
difference between them and others. One would think, according to these
men’s principles, that all these native beams of light (were there any
such) should, in those who have no reserves, no arts of concealment,
shine out in their full lustre, and leave us in no more doubt of their
being there, than we are of their love of pleasure and abhorrence of
pain. But alas, amongst children, idiots, savages, and the grossly
illiterate, what general maxims are to be found? what universal
principles of knowledge? Their notions are few and narrow, borrowed
only from those objects they have had most to do with, and which have
made upon their senses the frequentest and strongest impressions. A
child knows his nurse and his cradle, and by degrees the playthings of
a little more advanced age; and a young savage has, perhaps, his head
filled with love and hunting, according to the fashion of his tribe.
But he that from a child untaught, or a wild inhabitant of the woods,
will expect these abstract maxims and reputed principles of science,
will, I fear find himself mistaken. Such kind of general propositions
are seldom mentioned in the huts of Indians: much less are they to be
found in the thoughts of children, or any impressions of them on the
minds of naturals. They are the language and business of the schools
and academies of learned nations accustomed to that sort of
conversation or learning, where disputes are frequent; these maxims
being suited to artificial argumentation and useful for conviction, but
not much conducing to the discovery of truth or advancement of
knowledge. But of their small use for the improvement of knowledge I
shall have occasion to speak more at large, l.4, c. 7.

28. Recapitulation.

I know not how absurd this may seem to the masters of demonstration.
And probably it will hardly go down with anybody at first hearing. I
must therefore beg a little truce with prejudice, and the forbearance
of censure, till I have been heard out in the sequel of this Discourse,
being very willing to submit to better judgments. And since I
impartially search after truth, I shall not be sorry to be convinced,
that I have been too fond of my own notions; which I confess we are all
apt to be, when application and study have warmed our heads with them.

Upon the whole matter, I cannot see any ground to think these two
speculative Maxims innate: since they are not universally assented to;
and the assent they so generally find is no other than what several
propositions, not allowed to be innate, equally partake in with them:
and since the assent that is given them is produced another way, and
comes not from natural inscription, as I doubt not but to make appear
in the following Discourse. And if THESE “first principles” of
knowledge and science are found not to be innate, no OTHER speculative
maxims can (I suppose), with better right pretend to be so.




CHAPTER III.
NO INNATE PRACTICAL PRINCIPLES


1. No moral Principles so clear and so generally received as the
forementioned speculative Maxims.

If those speculative Maxims, whereof we discoursed in the foregoing
chapter, have not an actual universal assent from all mankind, as we
there proved, it is much more visible concerning PRACTICAL Principles,
that they come short of an universal reception: and I think it will be
hard to instance any one moral rule which can pretend to so general and
ready an assent as, “What is, is”; or to be so manifest a truth as
this, that “It is impossible for the same thing to be and not to be.”
Whereby it is evident that they are further removed from a title to be
innate; and the doubt of their being native impressions on the mind is
stronger against those moral principles than the other. Not that it
brings their truth at all in question. They are equally true, though
not equally evident. Those speculative maxims carry their own evidence
with them: but moral principles require reasoning and discourse, and
some exercise of the mind, to discover the certainty of their truth.
They lie not open as natural characters engraved on the mind; which, if
any such were, they must needs be visible by themselves, and by their
own light be certain and known to everybody. But this is no derogation
to their truth and certainty; no more than it is to the truth or
certainty of the three angles of a triangle being equal to two right
ones because it is not so evident as “the whole is bigger than a part,”
nor so apt to be assented to at first hearing. It may suffice that
these moral rules are capable of demonstration: and therefore it is our
own faults if we come not to a certain knowledge of them. But the
ignorance wherein many men are of them, and the slowness of assent
wherewith others receive them, are manifest proofs that they are not
innate, and such as offer themselves to their view without searching.

2. Faith and Justice not owned as Principles by all Men.

Whether there be any such moral principles, wherein all men do agree, I
appeal to any who have been but moderately conversant in the history of
mankind, and looked abroad beyond the smoke of their own chimneys.
Where is that practical truth that is universally received, without
doubt or question, as it must be if innate? JUSTICE, and keeping of
contracts, is that which most men seem to agree in. This is a principle
which is thought to extend itself to the dens of thieves, and the
confederacies of the greatest villains; and they who have gone furthest
towards the putting off of humanity itself, keep faith and rules of
justice one with another. I grant that outlaws themselves do this one
amongst another: but it is without receiving these as the innate laws
of nature. They practise them as rules of convenience within their own
communities: but it is impossible to conceive that he embraces justice
as a practical principle who acts fairly with his fellow-highwayman,
and at the same time plunders or kills the next honest man he meets
with. Justice and truth are the common ties of society; and therefore
even outlaws and robbers, who break with all the world besides, must
keep faith and rules of equity amongst themselves; or else they cannot
hold together. But will any one say, that those that live by fraud or
rapine have innate principles of truth and justice which they allow and
assent to?

3. Objection: though Men deny them in their Practice, yet they admit
them in their Thoughts answered.

Perhaps it will be urged, that the tacit assent of their minds agrees
to what their practice contradicts. I answer, first, I have always
thought the actions of men the best interpreters of their thoughts.
But, since it is certain that most men’s practices, and some men’s open
professions, have either questioned or denied these principles, it is
impossible to establish an universal consent, (though we should look
for it only amongst grown men,) without which it is impossible to
conclude them innate. Secondly, it is very strange and unreasonable to
suppose innate practical principles, that terminate only in
contemplation. Practical principles, derived from nature, are there for
operation, and must produce conformity of action, not barely
speculative assent to their truth, or else they are in vain
distinguished from speculative maxims. Nature, I confess, has put into
man a desire of happiness and an aversion to misery: these indeed are
innate practical principles which (as practical principles ought) DO
continue constantly to operate and influence all our actions without
ceasing: these may be observed in all persons and all ages, steady and
universal; but these are INCLINATIONS OF THE APPETITE to good, not
impressions of truth on the understanding. I deny not that there are
natural tendencies imprinted on the minds of men; and that from the
very first instances of sense and perception, there are some things
that are grateful and others unwelcome to them; some things that they
incline to and others that they fly: but this makes nothing for innate
characters on the mind, which are to be the principles of knowledge
regulating our practice. Such natural impressions on the understanding
are so far from being confirmed hereby, that this is an argument
against them; since, if there were certain characters imprinted by
nature on the understanding, as the principles of knowledge, we could
not but perceive them constantly operate in us and influence our
knowledge, as we do those others on the will and appetite; which never
cease to be the constant springs and motives of all our actions, to
which we perpetually feel them strongly impelling us.

4. Moral Rules need a Proof, _ergo_ not innate.

Another reason that makes me doubt of any innate practical principles
is, that I think _there cannot any one moral Rule be propos’d whereof a
Man may not justly demand a Reason:_ which would be perfectly
ridiculous and absurd if they were innate; or so much as self-evident,
which every innate principle must needs be, and not need any proof to
ascertain its truth, nor want any reason to gain it approbation. He
would be thought void of common sense who asked on the one side, or on
the other side went to give a reason WHY “it is impossible for the same
thing to be and not to be.” It carries its own light and evidence with
it, and needs no other proof: he that understands the terms assents to
it for its own sake or else nothing will ever be able to prevail with
him to do it. But should that most unshaken rule of morality and
foundation of all social virtue, “That one should do as he would be
done unto,” be proposed to one who never heard of it before, but yet is
of capacity to understand its meaning; might he not without any
absurdity ask a reason why? And were not he that proposed it bound to
make out the truth and reasonableness of it to him? Which plainly shows
it not to be innate; for if it were it could neither want nor receive
any proof; but must needs (at least as soon as heard and understood) be
received and assented to as an unquestionable truth, which a man can by
no means doubt of. So that the truth of all these moral rules plainly
depends upon some other antecedent to them, and from which they must be
deduced; which could not be if either they were innate or so much as
self-evident.

5. Instance in keeping Compacts

That men should keep their compacts is certainly a great and undeniable
rule in morality. But yet, if a Christian, who has the view of
happiness and misery in another life, be asked why a man must keep his
word, he will give this as a reason:—Because God, who has the power of
eternal life and death, requires it of us. But if a Hobbist be asked
why? he will answer:—Because the public requires it, and the Leviathan
will punish you if you do not. And if one of the old philosophers had
been asked, he would have answered:—Because it was dishonest, below the
dignity of a man, and opposite to virtue, the highest perfection of
human nature, to do otherwise.

6. Virtue generally approved not because innate, but because
profitable.

Hence naturally flows the great variety of opinions concerning moral
rules which are to be found among men, according to the different sorts
of happiness they have a prospect of, or propose to themselves; which
could not be if practical principles were innate, and imprinted in our
minds immediately by the hand of God. I grant the existence of God is
so many ways manifest, and the obedience we owe him so congruous to the
light of reason, that a great part of mankind give testimony to the law
of nature: but yet I think it must be allowed that several moral rules
may receive from mankind a very general approbation, without either
knowing or admitting the true ground of morality; which can only be the
will and law of a God, who sees men in the dark, has in his hand
rewards and punishments, and power enough to call to account the
proudest offender. For, God having, by an inseparable connexion, joined
virtue and public happiness together, and made the practice thereof
necessary to the preservation of society, and visibly beneficial to all
with whom the virtuous man has to do; it is no wonder that every one
should not only allow, but recommend and magnify those rules to others,
from whose observance of them he is sure to reap advantage to himself.
He may, out of interest as well as conviction, cry up that for sacred,
which, if once trampled on and profaned, he himself cannot be safe nor
secure. This, though it takes nothing from the moral and eternal
obligation which these rules evidently have, yet it shows that the
outward acknowledgment men pay to them in their words proves not that
they are innate principles: nay, it proves not so much as that men
assent to them inwardly in their own minds, as the inviolable rules of
their own practice; since we find that self-interest, and the
conveniences of this life, make many men own an outward profession and
approbation of them, whose actions sufficiently prove that they very
little consider the Lawgiver that prescribed these rules; nor the hell
that he has ordained for the punishment of those that transgress them.

7. Men’s actions convince us, that the Rule of Virtue is not their
internal Principle.

For, if we will not in civility allow too much sincerity to the
professions of most men, but think their actions to be the interpreters
of their thoughts, we shall find that they have no such internal
veneration for these rules, nor so full a persuasion of their certainty
and obligation. The great principle of morality, ‘To do as one would be
done to,’ is more commended than practised. But the breach of this rule
cannot be a greater vice, than to teach others, that it is no moral
rule, nor obligatory, would be thought madness, and contrary to that
interest men sacrifice to, when they break it themselves. Perhaps
CONSCIENCE will be urged as checking us for such breaches, and so the
internal obligation and establishment of the rule be preserved.

8. Conscience no Proof of any innate Moral Rule.

To which I answer, that I doubt not but, without being written on their
hearts, many men may, by the same way that they come to the knowledge
of other things, come to assent to several moral rules, and be
convinced of their obligation. Others also may come to be of the same
mind, from their education, company, and customs of their country;
which persuasion, however got, will serve to set conscience on work;
which is nothing else but our own opinion or judgment of the moral
rectitude or gravity of our own actions; and if conscience be a proof
of innate principles, contraries may be innate principles; since some
men with the same bent of conscience prosecute what others avoid.

9. Instances of Enormities practised without Remorse.

But I cannot see how any men should ever transgress those moral rules,
with confidence and serenity, were they innate, and stamped upon their
minds. View but an army at the sacking of a town, and see what
observation or sense of moral principles, or what touch of conscience
for all the outrages they do. Robberies, murders, rapes, are the sports
of men set at liberty from punishment and censure. Have there not been
whole nations, and those of the most civilized people, amongst whom the
exposing their children, and leaving them in the fields to perish by
want or wild beasts has been the practice; as little condemned or
scrupled as the begetting them? Do they not still, in some countries,
put them into the same graves with their mothers, if they die in
childbirth; or despatch them, if a pretended astrologer declares them
to have unhappy stars? And are there not places where, at a certain
age, they kill or expose their parents, without any remorse at all? In
a part of Asia, the sick, when their case comes to be thought
desperate, are carried out and laid on the earth before they are dead;
and left there, exposed to wind and weather, to perish without
assistance or pity. It is familiar among the Mingrelians, a people
professing Christianity, to bury their children alive without scruple.
There are places where they eat their own children. The Caribbees were
wont to geld their children, on purpose to fat and eat them. And
Garcilasso de la Vega tells us of a people in Peru which were wont to
fat and eat the children they got on their female captives, whom they
kept as concubines for that purpose, and when they were past breeding,
the mothers themselves were killed too and eaten. The virtues whereby
the Tououpinambos believed they merited paradise, were revenge, and
eating abundance of their enemies. They have not so much as a name for
God, and have no religion, no worship. The saints who are canonized
amongst the Turks, lead lives which one cannot with modesty relate. A
remarkable passage to this purpose, out of the voyage of Baumgarten,
which is a book not every day to be met with, I shall set down at
large, in the language it is published in.

Ibi (sc. prope Belbes in Aegypto) vidimus sanctum unum Saracenicum
inter arenarum cumulos, ita ut ex utero matris prodiit nudum sedentem.
Mos est, ut didicimus, Mahometistis, ut eos, qui amentes et sine
ratione sunt, pro sanctis colant et venerentur. Insuper et eos, qui cum
diu vitam egerint inquinatissimam, voluntariam demum poenitentiam et
paupertatem, sanctitate venerandos deputant. Ejusmodi vero genus
hominum libertatem quandam effrenem habent, domos quos volunt intrandi,
edendi, bibendi, et quod majus est, concumbendi; ex quo concubitu, si
proles secuta fuerit, sancta similiter habetur. His ergo hominibus dum
vivunt, magnos exhibent honores; mortuis vero vel templa vel monumenta
extruunt amplissima, eosque contingere ac sepelire maximae fortunae
ducunt loco. Audivimus haec dicta et dicenda per interpretem a Mucrelo
nostro. Insuper sanctum ilium, quern eo loco vidimus, publicitus
apprime commendari, eum esse hominem sanctum, divinum ac integritate
praecipuum; eo quod, nec faminarum unquam esset, nec puerorum, sed
tantummodo asellarum concubitor atque mularum. (Peregr. Baumgarten, 1.
ii. c. i. p. 73.)

Where then are those innate principles of justice, piety, gratitude,
equity, chastity? Or where is that universal consent that assures us
there are such inbred rules? Murders in duels, when fashion has made
them honourable, are committed without remorse of conscience: nay, in
many places innocence in this case is the greatest ignominy. And if we
look abroad to take a view of men as they are, we shall find that they
have remorse, in one place, for doing or omitting that which others, in
another place, think they merit by.

10. Men have contrary practical Principles.

He that will carefully peruse the history of mankind, and look abroad
into the several tribes of men, and with indifferency survey their
actions, will be able to satisfy himself, that there is scarce that
principle of morality to be named, or, rule of virtue to be thought on,
(those only excepted that are absolutely necessary to hold society
together, which commonly too are neglected betwixt distinct societies,)
which is not, somewhere or other, slighted and condemned by the general
fashion of whole societies of men, governed by practical opinions and
rules of living quite opposite to others.

11. Whole Nations reject several Moral Rules.

Here perhaps it will be objected, that it is no argument that the rule
is not known, because it is broken. I grant the objection good where
men, though they transgress, yet disown not the law; where fear of
shame, censure, or punishment, carries the mark of some awe it has upon
them. But it is impossible to conceive that a whole nation of men
should all publicly reject and renounce what every one of them
certainly and infallibly knew to be a law; for so they must who have it
naturally imprinted on their minds. It is possible men may sometimes
own rules of morality which in their private thoughts they do not
believe to be true, only to keep themselves in reputation and esteem
amongst those who are persuaded of their obligation. But it is not to
be imagined that a whole society of men should publicly and professedly
disown and cast off a rule which they could not in their own minds but
be infallibly certain was a law; nor be ignorant that all men they
should have to do with knew it to be such: and therefore must every one
of them apprehend from others all the contempt and abhorrence due to
one who professes himself void of humanity: and one who, confounding
the known and natural measures of right and wrong, cannot but be looked
on as the professed enemy of their peace and happiness. Whatever
practical principle is innate, cannot but be known to every one to be
just and good. It is therefore little less than a contradiction to
suppose, that whole nations of men should, both in their professions
and practice, unanimously and universally give the lie to what, by the
most invincible evidence, every one of them knew to be true, right, and
good. This is enough to satisfy us that no practical rule which is
anywhere universally, and with public approbation or allowance,
transgressed, can be supposed innate.—But I have something further to
add in answer to this objection.

12. The generally allowed breach of a rule proof that it is not innate.

The breaking of a rule, say you, is no argument that it is unknown. I
grant it: but the GENERALLY ALLOWED breach of it anywhere, I say, is a
proof that it is not innate. For example: let us take any of these
rules, which, being the most obvious deductions of human reason, and
conformable to the natural inclination of the greatest part of men,
fewest people have had the impudence to deny or inconsideration to
doubt of. If any can be thought to be naturally imprinted, none, I
think, can have a fairer pretence to be innate than this: “Parents,
preserve and cherish your children.” When, therefore, you say that this
is an innate rule, what do you mean? Either that it is an innate
principle which upon all occasions excites and directs the actions of
all men; or else, that it is a truth which all men have imprinted on
their minds, and which therefore they know and assent to. But in
neither of these senses is it innate. FIRST, that it is not a principle
which influences all men’s actions, is what I have proved by the
examples before cited: nor need we seek so far as the Mingrelia or Peru
to find instances of such as neglect, abuse, nay, and destroy their
children; or look on it only as the more than brutality of some savage
and barbarous nations, when we remember that it was a familiar and
uncondemned practice amongst the Greeks and Romans to expose, without
pity or remorse, their innocent infants. SECONDLY, that it is an innate
truth, known to all men, is also false. For, “Parents preserve your
children,” is so far from an innate truth, that it is no truth at all:
it being a command, and not a proposition, and so not capable of truth
or falsehood. To make it capable of being assented to as true, it must
be reduced to some such proposition as this: “It is the duty of parents
to preserve their children.” But what duty is, cannot be understood
without a law; nor a law be known or supposed without a lawmaker, or
without reward and punishment; so that it is impossible that this, or
any other, practical principle should be innate, i.e. be imprinted on
the mind as a duty, without supposing the ideas of God, of law, of
obligation, of punishment, of a life after this, innate: for that
punishment follows not in this life the breach of this rule, and
consequently that it has not the force of a law in countries where the
generally allowed practice runs counter to it, is in itself evident.
But these ideas (which must be all of them innate, if anything as a
duty be so) are so far from being innate, that it is not every studious
or thinking man, much less every one that is born, in whom they are to
be found clear and distinct; and that one of them, which of all others
seems most likely to be innate, is not so, (I mean the idea of God,) I
think, in the next chapter, will appear very evident to any considering
man.

13. If men can be ignorant of what is innate, certainty is not
described by innate principles.

From what has been said, I think we may safely conclude that whatever
practical rule is in any place generally and with allowance broken,
cannot be supposed innate; it being impossible that men should, without
shame or fear, confidently and serenely, break a rule which they could
not but evidently know that God had set up, and would certainly punish
the breach of, (which they must, if it were innate,) to a degree to
make it a very ill bargain to the transgressor. Without such a
knowledge as this, a man can never be certain that anything is his
duty. Ignorance or doubt of the law, hopes to escape the knowledge or
power of the law-maker, or the like, may make men give way to a present
appetite; but let any one see the fault, and the rod by it, and with
the transgression, a fire ready to punish it; a pleasure tempting, and
the hand of the Almighty visibly held up and prepared to take
vengeance, (for this must be the case where any duty is imprinted on
the mind,) and then tell me whether it be possible for people with such
a prospect, such a certain knowledge as this, wantonly, and without
scruple, to offend against a law which they carry about them in
indelible characters, and that stares them in the face whilst they are
breaking it? Whether men, at the same time that they feel in themselves
the imprinted edicts of an Omnipotent Law-maker, can, with assurance
and gaiety, slight and trample underfoot his most sacred injunctions?
And lastly, whether it be possible that whilst a man thus openly bids
defiance to this innate law and supreme Lawgiver, all the bystanders,
yea, even the governors and rulers of the people, full of the same
sense both of the law and Law-maker, should silently connive, without
testifying their dislike or laying the least blame on it? Principles of
actions indeed there are lodged in men’s appetites; but these are so
far from being innate moral principles, that if they were left to their
full swing they would carry men to the overturning of all morality.
Moral laws are set as a curb and restraint to these exorbitant desires,
which they cannot be but by rewards and punishments that will
overbalance the satisfaction any one shall propose to himself in the
breach of the law. If, therefore, anything be imprinted on the minds of
all men as a law, all men must have a certain and unavoidable knowledge
that certain and unavoidable punishment will attend the breach of it.
For if men can be ignorant or doubtful of what is innate, innate
principles are insisted on, and urged to no purpose; truth and
certainty (the things pretended) are not at all secured by them; but
men are in the same uncertain floating estate with as without them. An
evident indubitable knowledge of unavoidable punishment, great enough
to make the transgression very uneligible, must accompany an innate
law; unless with an innate law they can suppose an innate Gospel too. I
would not here be mistaken, as if, because I deny an innate law I
thought there were none but positive laws. There is a great deal of
difference between an innate law, and a law of nature between something
imprinted on our minds in their very original, and something that we,
being ignorant of, may attain to the knowledge of, by the use and due
application of our natural faculties. And I think they equally forsake
the truth who, running into contrary extremes, either affirm an innate
law, or deny that there is a law knowable by the light of nature, i.e.
without the help of positive revelation.

14. Those who maintain innate practical Principles tell us not what
they are.

The difference there is amongst men in their practical principles is so
evident that I think I need say no more to evince, that it will be
impossible to find any innate moral rules by this mark of general
assent; and it is enough to make one suspect that the supposition of
such innate principles is but an opinion taken up at pleasure; since
those who talk so confidently of them are so sparing to tell us WHICH
THEY ARE. This might with justice be expected from those men who lay
stress upon this opinion; and it gives occasion to distrust either
their knowledge or charity, who, declaring that God has imprinted on
the minds of men the foundations of knowledge and the rules of living,
are yet so little favourable to the information of their neighbours, or
the quiet of mankind, as not to point out to them which they are, in
the variety men are distracted with. But, in truth, were there any such
innate principles there would be no need to teach them. Did men find
such innate propositions stamped on their minds, they would easily be
able to distinguish them from other truths that they afterwards learned
and deduced from them; and there would be nothing more easy than to
know what, and how many, they were. There could be no more doubt about
their number than there is about the number of our fingers; and it is
like then every system would be ready to give them us by tale. But
since nobody, that I know, has ventured yet to give a catalogue of
them, they cannot blame those who doubt of these innate principles;
since even they who require men to believe that there are such innate
propositions, do not tell us what they are. It is easy to foresee, that
if different men of different sects should go about to give us a list
of those innate practical principles, they would set down only such as
suited their distinct hypotheses, and were fit to support the doctrines
of their particular schools or churches; a plain evidence that there
are no such innate truths. Nay, a great part of men are so far from
finding any such innate moral principles in themselves, that, by
denying freedom to mankind, and thereby making men no other than bare
machines, they take away not only innate, but all moral rules
whatsoever, and leave not a possibility to believe any such, to those
who cannot conceive how anything can be capable of a law that is not a
free agent. And upon that ground they must necessarily reject all
principles of virtue, who cannot put MORALITY and MECHANISM together,
which are not very easy to be reconciled or made consistent.

15. Lord Herbert’s innate Principles examined.

When I had written this, being informed that my Lord Herbert had, in
his book De Veritate, assigned these innate principles, I presently
consulted him, hoping to find in a man of so great parts, something
that might satisfy me in this point, and put an end to my inquiry. In
his chapter De Instinctu Naturali, I met with these six marks of his
Notitice Communes:—1. Prioritas. 2. Independentia. 3. Universalitas. 4.
Certitudo. 5. Necessitas, i. e. as he explains it, faciunt ad hominis
conservationem. 6. Modus conformationis, i.e. Assensus nulla
interposita mora. And at the latter end of his little treatise De
Religione Laici, he says this of these innate principles: Adeo ut non
uniuscujusvis religionis confinio arctentur quae ubique vigent
veritates. Sunt enim in ipsa mente caelitus descriptae, nullisque
traditionibus, sive scriptis, sive non scriptis, obnoxiae, p.3 And
Veritates nostrae catholicae, quae tanquam indubia Dei emata in foro
interiori descriptae.

Thus, having given the marks of the innate principles or common
notions, and asserted their being imprinted on the minds of men by the
hand of God, he proceeds to set them down, and they are these:—1. Esse
aliquod supremum numen. 2. Numen illud coli debere. 3. Virtutem cum
pietate conjunctam optimum esse rationem cultus divini. 4.
Resipiscendum esse a peccatis. 5. Dari praemium vel paenam post hanc
vitam transactam. Though I allow these to be clear truths, and such as,
if rightly explained, a rational creature can hardly avoid giving his
assent to, yet I think he is far from proving them innate impressions
in foro interiori descriptae. For I must take leave to observe:—

16. These five either not all, or more than all, if there are any.

First, that these five propositions are either not all, or more than
all, those common notions written on our minds by the finger of God; if
it were reasonable to believe any at all to be so written. Since there
are other propositions which, even by his own rules, have as just a
pretence to such an original, and may be as well admitted for innate
principles, as at least some of these five he enumerates, viz. ‘Do as
thou wouldst be done unto.’ And perhaps some hundreds of others, when
well considered.

17. The supposed marks wanting.

Secondly, that all his marks are not to be found in each of his five
propositions, viz. his first, second, and third marks agree perfectly
to neither of them; and the first, second, third, fourth, and sixth
marks agree but ill to his third, fourth, and fifth propositions. For,
besides that we are assured from history of many men, nay whole
nations, who doubt or disbelieve some or all of them, I cannot see how
the third, viz. “That virtue joined with piety is the best worship of
God,” can be an innate principle, when the name or sound virtue, is so
hard to be understood; liable to so much uncertainty in its
signification; and the thing it stands for so much contended about and
difficult to be known. And therefore this cannot be but a very
uncertain rule of human practice, and serve but very little to the
conduct of our lives, and is therefore very unfit to be assigned as an
innate practical principle.

18. Of little use if they were innate.

For let us consider this proposition as to its meaning, (for it is the
sense, and not sound, that is and must be the principle or common
notion,) viz. “Virtue is the best worship of God,” i.e. is most
acceptable to him; which, if virtue be taken, as most commonly it is,
for those actions which, according to the different opinions of several
countries, are accounted laudable, will be a proposition so far from
being certain, that it will not be true. If virtue be taken for actions
conformable to God’s will, or to the rule prescribed by God—which is
the true and only measure of virtue when virtue is used to signify what
is in its own nature right and good—then this proposition, “That virtue
is the best worship of God,” will be most true and certain, but of very
little use in human life: since it will amount to no more but this,
viz. “That God is pleased with the doing of what he commands”;—which a
man may certainly know to be true, without knowing what it is that God
doth command; and so be as far from any rule or principle of his
actions as he was before. And I think very few will take a proposition
which amounts to no more than this, viz. “That God is pleased with the
doing of what he himself commands,” for an innate moral principle
written on the minds of all men, (however true and certain it may be,)
since it teaches so little. Whosoever does so will have reason to think
hundreds of propositions innate principles; since there are many which
have as good a title as this to be received for such, which nobody yet
ever put into that rank of innate principles.

19. Scarce possible that God should engrave principles in words of
uncertain meaning.

Nor is the fourth proposition (viz. “Men must repent of their sins”)
much more instructive, till what those actions are that are meant by
sins be set down. For the word peccata, or sins, being put, as it
usually is, to signify in general ill actions that will draw punishment
upon the doers, what great principle of morality can that be to tell us
we should be sorry, and cease to do that which will bring mischief upon
us; without knowing what those particular actions are that will do so?
Indeed this is a very true proposition, and fit to be inculcated on and
received by those who are supposed to have been taught WHAT actions in
all kinds ARE sins: but neither this nor the former can be imagined to
be innate principles; nor to be of any use if they were innate, unless
the particular measures and bounds of all virtues and vices were
engraven in men’s minds, and were innate principles also, which I think
is very much to be doubted. And therefore, I imagine, it will scarcely
seem possible that God should engrave principles in men’s minds, in
words of uncertain signification, such as VIRTUES and SINS, which
amongst different men stand for different things: nay, it cannot be
supposed to be in words at all, which, being in most of these
principles very general names, cannot be understood but by knowing the
particulars comprehended under them. And in the practical instances,
the measures must be taken from the knowledge of the actions
themselves, and the rules of them,—abstracted from words, and
antecedent to the knowledge of names; which rules a man must know, what
language soever he chance to learn, whether English or Japan, or if he
should learn no language at all, or never should understand the use of
words, as happens in the case of dumb and deaf men. When it shall be
made out that men ignorant of words, or untaught by the laws and
customs of their country, know that it is part of the worship of God
not to kill another man; not to know more women than one; not to
procure abortion; not to expose their children; not to take from
another what is his, though we want it ourselves, but on the contrary,
relieve and supply his wants; and whenever we have done the contrary we
ought to repent, be sorry, and resolve to do so no more;—when I say,
all men shall be proved actually to know and allow all these and a
thousand other such rules, all of which come under these two general
words made use of above, viz. virtutes et peccata virtues and sins,
there will be more reason for admitting these and the like, for common
notions and practical principles. Yet, after all, universal consent
(were there any in moral principles) to truths, the knowledge whereof
may be attained otherwise, would scarce prove them to be innate; which
is all I contend for.

20. Objection, Innate Principles may be corrupted, answered.

Nor will it be of much moment here to offer that very ready but not
very material answer, viz. that the innate principles of morality may,
by education, and custom, and the general opinion of those amongst whom
we converse, be darkened, and at last quite worn out of the minds of
men. Which assertion of theirs, if true, quite takes away the argument
of universal consent, by which this opinion of innate principles is
endeavoured to be proved; unless those men will think it reasonable
that their private persuasions, or that of their party, should pass for
universal consent;—a thing not unfrequently done, when men, presuming
themselves to be the only masters of right reason, cast by the votes
and opinions of the rest of mankind as not worthy the reckoning. And
then their argument stands thus:—“The principles which all mankind
allow for true, are innate; those that men of right reason admit, are
the principles allowed by all mankind; we, and those of our mind, are
men of reason; therefore, we agreeing, our principles are
innate”;—which is a very pretty way of arguing, and a short cut to
infallibility. For otherwise it will be very hard to understand how
there be some principles which all men do acknowledge and agree in; and
yet there are none of those principles which are not, by depraved
custom and ill education, blotted out of the minds of many men: which
is to say, that all men admit, but yet many men do deny and dissent
from them. And indeed the supposition of SUCH first principles will
serve us to very little purpose; and we shall be as much at a loss with
as without them, if they may, by any human power—such as the will of
our teachers, or opinions of our companions—be altered or lost in us:
and notwithstanding all this boast of first principles and innate
light, we shall be as much in the dark and uncertainty as if there were
no such thing at all: it being all one to have no rule, and one that
will warp any way; or amongst various and contrary rules, not to know
which is the right. But concerning innate principles, I desire these
men to say, whether they can or cannot, by education and custom, be
blurred and blotted out; if they cannot, we must find them in all
mankind alike, and they must be clear in everybody; and if they may
suffer variation from adventitious notions, we must then find them
clearest and most perspicuous nearest the fountain, in children and
illiterate people, who have received least impression from foreign
opinions. Let them take which side they please, they will certainly
find it inconsistent with visible matter of fact and daily observation.

21. Contrary Principles in the World.

I easily grant that there are great numbers of opinions which, by men
of different countries, educations, and tempers, are received and
embraced as first and unquestionable principles; many whereof, both for
their absurdity as well as oppositions to one another, it is impossible
should be true. But yet all those propositions, how remote soever from
reason are so sacred somewhere or other, that men even of good
understanding in other matters, will sooner part with their lives, and
whatever is dearest to them, than suffer themselves to doubt, or others
to question, the truth of them.

22. How men commonly come by their Principles.

This, however strange it may seem, is that which every day’s experience
confirms; and will not, perhaps, appear so wonderful, if we consider
the ways and steps by which it is brought about; and how really it may
come to pass, that doctrines that have been derived from no better
original than the superstition of a nurse, or the authority of an old
woman, may, by length of time and consent of neighbours, grow up to the
dignity of PRINCIPLES in religion or morality. For such, who are
careful (as they call it) to principle children well, (and few there be
who have not a set of those principles for them, which they believe
in,) instil into the unwary, and as yet unprejudiced, understanding,
(for white paper receives any characters,) those doctrines they would
have them retain and profess. These being taught them as soon as they
have any apprehension; and still as they grow up confirmed to them,
either by the open profession or tacit consent of all they have to do
with; or at least by those of whose wisdom, knowledge, and piety they
have an opinion, who never suffer those propositions to be otherwise
mentioned but as the basis and foundation on which they build their
religion and manners, come, by these means, to have the reputation of
unquestionable, self-evident, and innate truths.

23. Principles supposed innate because we do not remember when we began
to hold them.

To which we may add, that when men so instructed are grown up, and
reflect on their own minds, they cannot find anything more ancient
there than those opinions, which were taught them before their memory
began to keep a register of their actions, or date the time when any
new thing appeared to them; and therefore make no scruple to conclude,
that those propositions of whose knowledge they can find in themselves
no original, were certainly the impress of God and nature upon their
minds, and not taught them by any one else. These they entertain and
submit to, as many do to their parents with veneration; not because it
is natural: nor do children do it where they are not so taught; but
because, having been always so educated, and having no remembrance of
the beginning of this respect, they think it is natural.

24. How such principles come to be held.

This will appear very likely, and almost unavoidable to come to pass,
if we consider the nature of mankind and the constitution of human
affairs; wherein most men cannot live without employing their time in
the daily labours of their callings; nor be at quiet in their minds
without SOME foundation or principle to rest their thoughts on. There
is scarcely any one so floating and superficial in his understanding,
who hath not some reverenced propositions, which are to him the
principles on which he bottoms his reasonings, and by which he judgeth
of truth and falsehood, right and wrong; which some, wanting skill and
leisure, and others the inclination, and some being taught that they
ought not to examine, there are few to be found who are not exposed by
their ignorance, laziness, education, or precipitancy, to TAKE THEM
UPON TRUST.

25. Further explained.

This is evidently the case of all children and young folk; and custom,
a greater power than nature, seldom failing to make them worship for
divine what she hath inured them to bow their minds and submit their
understandings to, it is no wonder that grown men, either perplexed in
the necessary affairs of life, or hot in the pursuit of pleasures,
should not seriously sit down to examine their own tenets; especially
when one of their principles is, that principles ought not to be
questioned. And had men leisure, parts, and will, who is there almost
that dare shake the foundations of all his past thoughts and actions,
and endure to bring upon himself the shame of having been a long time
wholly in mistake and error? Who is there hardy enough to contend with
the reproach which is everywhere prepared for those who dare venture to
dissent from the received opinions of their country or party? And where
is the man to be found that can patiently prepare himself to bear the
name of whimsical, sceptical, or atheist; which he is sure to meet
with, who does in the least scruple any of the common opinions? And he
will be much more afraid to question those principles, when he shall
think them, as most men do, the standards set up by God in his mind, to
be the rule and touchstone of all other opinions. And what can hinder
him from thinking them sacred, when he finds them the earliest of all
his own thoughts, and the most reverenced by others?

26. A worship of idols.

It is easy to imagine how, by these means, it comes to pass that men
worship the idols that have been set up in their minds; grow fond of
the notions they have been long acquainted with there; and stamp the
characters of divinity upon absurdities and errors; become zealous
votaries to bulls and monkeys, and contend too, fight, and die in
defence of their opinions. _Dum solos credit habendos esse deos, quos
ipse colit_. For, since the reasoning faculties of the soul, which are
almost constantly, though not always warily nor wisely employed, would
not know how to move, for want of a foundation and footing, in most
men, who through laziness or avocation do not, or for want of time, or
true helps, or for other causes, cannot penetrate into the principles
of knowledge, and trace truth to its fountain and original, it is
natural for them, and almost unavoidable, to take up with some borrowed
principles; which being reputed and presumed to be the evident proofs
of other things, are thought not to need any other proof themselves.
Whoever shall receive any of these into his mind, and entertain them
there with the reverence usually paid to principles, never venturing to
examine them, but accustoming himself to believe them, because they are
to be believed, may take up, from his education and the fashions of his
country, any absurdity for innate principles; and by long poring on the
same objects, so dim his sight as to take monsters lodged in his own
brain for the images of the Deity, and the workmanship of his hands.

27. Principles must be examined.

By this progress, how many there are who arrive at principles which
they believe innate may be easily observed, in the variety of opposite
principles held and contended for by all sorts and degrees of men. And
he that shall deny this to be the method wherein most men proceed to
the assurance they have of the truth and evidence of their principles,
will perhaps find it a hard matter any other way to account for the
contrary tenets, which are firmly believed, confidently asserted, and
which great numbers are ready at any time to seal with their blood.
And, indeed, if it be the privilege of innate principles to be received
upon their own authority, without examination, I know not what may not
be believed, or how any one’s principles can be questioned. If they may
and ought to be examined and tried, I desire to know how first and
innate principles can be tried; or at least it is reasonable to demand
the MARKS and CHARACTERS whereby the genuine innate principles may be
distinguished from others: that so, amidst the great variety of
pretenders, I may be kept from mistakes in so material a point as this.
When this is done, I shall be ready to embrace such welcome and useful
propositions; and till then I may with modesty doubt; since I fear
universal consent, which is the only one produced, will scarcely prove
a sufficient mark to direct my choice, and assure me of any innate
principles.

From what has been said, I think it past doubt, that there are no
practical principles wherein all men agree; and therefore none innate.




CHAPTER IV.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING INNATE PRINCIPLES, BOTH SPECULATIVE AND
PRACTICAL.


1. Principles not innate, unless their Ideas be innate

Had those who would persuade us that there are innate principles not
taken them together in gross, but considered separately the parts out
of which those propositions are made, they would not, perhaps, have
been so forward to believe they were innate. Since, if the IDEAS which
made up those truths were not, it was impossible that the PROPOSITIONS
made up of them should be innate, or our knowledge of them be born with
us. For, if the ideas be not innate, there was a time when the mind was
without those principles; and then they will not be innate, but be
derived from some other original. For, where the ideas themselves are
not, there can be no knowledge, no assent, no mental or verbal
propositions about them.

2. Ideas, especially those belonging to Principles, not born with
children

If we will attentively consider new-born children, we shall have little
reason to think that they bring many ideas into the world with them.
For, bating perhaps some faint ideas of hunger, and thirst, and warmth,
and some pains, which they may have felt in the womb, there is not the
least appearance of any settled ideas at all in them; especially of
IDEAS ANSWERING THE TERMS WHICH MAKE UP THOSE UNIVERSAL PROPOSITIONS
THAT ARE ESTEEMED INNATE PRINCIPLES. One may perceive how, by degrees,
afterwards, ideas come into their minds; and that they get no more, nor
other, than what experience, and the observation of things that come in
their way, furnish them with; which might be enough to satisfy us that
they are not original characters stamped on the mind.

3. Impossibility and Identity not innate ideas

“It is impossible for the same thing to be, and not to be,” is
certainly (if there be any such) an innate PRINCIPLE. But can any one
think, or will any one say, that “impossibility” and “identity” are two
innate IDEAS? Are they such as all mankind have, and bring into the
world with them? And are they those which are the first in children,
and antecedent to all acquired ones? If they are innate, they must
needs be so. Hath a child an idea of impossibility and identity, before
it has of white or black, sweet or bitter? And is it from the knowledge
of this principle that it concludes, that wormwood rubbed on the nipple
hath not the same taste that it used to receive from thence? Is it the
actual knowledge of IMPOSSIBILE EST IDEM ESSE, ET NON ESSE, that makes
a child distinguish between its mother and a stranger; or that makes it
fond of the one and flee the other? Or does the mind regulate itself
and its assent by ideas that it never yet had? Or the understanding
draw conclusions from principles which it never yet knew or understood?
The names IMPOSSIBILITY and IDENTITY stand for two ideas, so far from
being innate, or born with us, that I think it requires great care and
attention to form them right in our understandings. They are so far
from being brought into the world with us, so remote from the thoughts
of infancy and childhood, that I believe, upon examination it will be
found that many grown men want them.

4. Identity, an Idea not innate.

If IDENTITY (to instance that alone) be a native impression, and
consequently so clear and obvious to us that we must needs know it even
from our cradles, I would gladly be resolved by any one of seven, or
seventy years old, whether a man, being a creature consisting of soul
and body, be the same man when his body is changed? Whether Euphorbus
and Pythagoras, having had the same soul, were the same men, though
they lived several ages asunder? Nay, whether the cock too, which had
the same soul, were not the same, with both of them? Whereby, perhaps,
it will appear that our idea of SAMENESS is not so settled and clear as
to deserve to be thought innate in us. For if those innate ideas are
not clear and distinct, so as to be universally known and naturally
agreed on, they cannot be subjects of universal and undoubted truths,
but will be the unavoidable occasion of perpetual uncertainty. For, I
suppose every one’s idea of identity will not be the same that
Pythagoras and thousands of his followers have. And which then shall be
true? Which innate? Or are there two different ideas of identity, both
innate?

5. What makes the same man?

Nor let any one think that the questions I have here proposed about the
identity of man are bare empty speculations; which, if they were, would
be enough to show, that there was in the understandings of men no
innate idea of identity. He that shall with a little attention reflect
on the resurrection, and consider that divine justice will bring to
judgment, at the last day, the very same persons, to be happy or
miserable in the other, who did well or ill in this life, will find it
perhaps not easy to resolve with himself, what makes the same man, or
wherein identity consists; and will not be forward to think he, and
every one, even children themselves, have naturally a clear idea of it.

6. Whole and Part not innate ideas.

Let us examine that principle of mathematics, viz. THAT THE WHOLE IS
BIGGER THAN A PART. This, I take it, is reckoned amongst innate
principles. I am sure it has as good a title as any to be thought so;
which yet nobody can think it to be, when he considers the ideas it
comprehends in it, WHOLE and PART, are perfectly relative; but the
positive ideas to which they properly and immediately belong are
extension and number, of which alone whole and part are relations. So
that if whole and part are innate ideas, extension and number must be
so too; it being impossible to have an idea of a relation, without
having any at all of the thing to which it belongs, and in which it is
founded. Now, whether the minds of men have naturally imprinted on them
the ideas of extension and number, I leave to be considered by those
who are the patrons of innate principles.

7. Idea of Worship not innate.

That GOD IS TO BE WORSHIPPED, is, without doubt, as great a truth as
any that can enter into the mind of man, and deserves the first place
amongst all practical principles. But yet it can by no means be thought
innate, unless the ideas of GOD and WORSHIP are innate. That the idea
the term worship stands for is not in the understanding of children,
and a character stamped on the mind in its first original, I think will
be easily granted, by any one that considers how few there be amongst
grown men who have a clear and distinct notion of it. And, I suppose,
there cannot be anything more ridiculous than to say, that children
have this practical principle innate, “That God is to be worshipped,”
and yet that they know not what that worship of God is, which is their
duty. But to pass by this.

8. Idea of God not innate.

If any idea can be imagined innate, the idea of GOD may, of all others,
for many reasons, be thought so; since it is hard to conceive how there
should be innate moral principles, without an innate idea of a Deity.
Without a notion of a law-maker, it is impossible to have a notion of a
law, and an obligation to observe it. Besides the atheists taken notice
of amongst the ancients, and left branded upon the records of history,
hath not navigation discovered, in these later ages, whole nations, at
the bay of Soldania, in Brazil, and in the Caribbee islands, &c.,
amongst whom there was to be found no notion of a God, no religion?
Nicholaus del Techo, in Literis ex Paraquaria, de Caiguarum
Conversione, has these words: Reperi eam gentem nullum nomen habere
quod Deum, et hominis animam significet; nulla sacra habet, nulla
idola.

And perhaps, if we should with attention mind the lives and discourses
of people not so far off, we should have too much reason to fear, that
many, in more civilized countries, have no very strong and clear
impressions of a Deity upon their minds, and that the complaints of
atheism made from the pulpit are not without reason. And though only
some profligate wretches own it too barefacedly now; yet perhaps we
should hear more than we do of it from others, did not the fear of the
magistrate’s sword, or their neighbour’s censure, tie up people’s
tongues; which, were the apprehensions of punishment or shame taken
away, would as openly proclaim their atheism as their lives do.

9. The name of God not universal or obscure in meaning.

But had all mankind everywhere a notion of a God, (whereof yet history
tells us the contrary,) it would not from thence follow, that the idea
of him was innate. For, though no nation were to be found without a
name, and some few dark notions of him, yet that would not prove them
to be natural impressions on the mind; no more than the names of fire,
or the sun, heat, or number, do prove the ideas they stand for to be
innate; because the names of those things, and the ideas of them, are
so universally received and known amongst mankind. Nor, on the
contrary, is the want of such a name, or the absence of such a notion
out of men’s minds, any argument against the being of a God; any more
than it would be a proof that there was no loadstone in the world,
because a great part of mankind had neither a notion of any such thing
nor a name for it; or be any show of argument to prove that there are
no distinct and various species of angels, or intelligent beings above
us, because we have no ideas of such distinct species, or names for
them. For, men being furnished with words, by the common language of
their own countries, can scarce avoid having some kind of ideas of
those things whose names those they converse with have occasion
frequently to mention to them. And if they carry with it the notion of
excellency, greatness, or something extraordinary; if apprehension and
concernment accompany it; if the fear of absolute and irresistible
power set it on upon the mind,—the idea is likely to sink the deeper,
and spread the further; especially if it be such an idea as is
agreeable to the common light of reason, and naturally deducible from
every part of our knowledge, as that of a God is. For the visible marks
of extraordinary wisdom and power appear so plainly in all the works of
the creation, that a rational creature, who will but seriously reflect
on them, cannot miss the discovery of a Deity. And the influence that
the discovery of such a Being must necessarily have on the minds of all
that have but once heard of it is so great, and carries such a weight
of thought and communication with it, that it seems stranger to me that
a whole nation of men should be anywhere found so brutish as to want
the notion of a God, than that they should be without any notion of
numbers, or fire.

10. Ideas of God and idea of Fire.

The name of God being once mentioned in any part of the world, to
express a superior, powerful, wise, invisible Being, the suitableness
of such a notion to the principles of common reason, and the interest
men will always have to mention it often, must necessarily spread it
far and wide; and continue it down to all generations: though yet the
general reception of this name, and some imperfect and unsteady notions
conveyed thereby to the unthinking part of mankind, prove not the idea
to be innate; but only that they who made the discovery had made a
right use of their reason, thought maturely of the causes of things,
and traced them to their original; from whom other less considering
people having once received so important a notion, it could not easily
be lost again.

11. Idea of God not innate.

This is all could be inferred from the notion of a God, were it to be
found universally in all the tribes of mankind, and generally
acknowledged, by men grown to maturity in all countries. For the
generality of the acknowledging of a God, as I imagine, is extended no
further than that; which, if it be sufficient to prove the idea of God
innate, will as well prove the idea of fire innate; since I think it
may be truly said, that there is not a person in the world who has a
notion of a God, who has not also the idea of fire. I doubt not but if
a colony of young children should be placed in an island where no fire
was, they would certainly neither have any notion of such a thing, nor
name for it, how generally soever it were received and known in all the
world besides; and perhaps too their apprehensions would be as far
removed from any name, or notion, of a God, till some one amongst them
had employed his thoughts to inquire into the constitution and causes
of things, which would easily lead him to the notion of a God; which
having once taught to others, reason, and the natural propensity of
their own thoughts, would afterwards propagate, and continue amongst
them.

12. Suitable to God’s goodness, that all Men should have an idea of
Him, therefore naturally imprinted by Him, answered.

Indeed it is urged, that it is suitable to the goodness of God, to
imprint upon the minds of men characters and notions of himself, and
not to leave them in the dark and doubt in so grand a concernment; and
also, by that means, to secure to himself the homage and veneration due
from so intelligent a creature as man; and therefore he has done it.

This argument, if it be of any force, will prove much more than those
who use it in this case expect from it. For, if we may conclude that
God hath done for men all that men shall judge is best for them,
because it is suitable to his goodness so to do, it will prove, not
only that God has imprinted on the minds of men an idea of himself, but
that he hath plainly stamped there, in fair characters, all that men
ought to know or believe of him; all that they ought to do in obedience
to his will; and that he hath given them a will and affections
conformable to it. This, no doubt, every one will think better for men,
than that they should, in the dark, grope after knowledge, as St. Paul
tells us all nations did after God (Acts xvii. 27); than that their
wills should clash with their understandings, and their appetites cross
their duty. The Romanists say it is best for men, and so suitable to
the goodness of God, that there should be an infallible judge of
controversies on earth; and therefore there is one. And I, by the same
reason, say it is better for men that every man himself should be
infallible. I leave them to consider, whether, by the force of this
argument, they shall think that every man IS so. I think it a very good
argument to say,—the infinitely wise God hath made it so; and therefore
it is best. But it seems to me a little too much confidence of our own
wisdom to say,—‘I think it best; and therefore God hath made it so.’
And in the matter in hand, it will be in vain to argue from such a
topic, that God hath done so, when certain experience shows us that he
hath not. But the goodness of God hath not been wanting to men, without
such original impressions of knowledge or ideas stamped on the mind;
since he hath furnished man with those faculties which will serve for
the sufficient discovery of all things requisite to the end of such a
being; and I doubt not but to show, that a man, by the right use of his
natural abilities, may, without any innate principles, attain a
knowledge of a God, and other things that concern him. God having
endued man with those faculties of knowledge which he hath, was no more
obliged by his goodness to plant those innate notions in his mind, than
that, having given him reason, hands, and materials, he should build
him bridges or houses,—which some people in the world, however of good
parts, do either totally want, or are but ill provided of, as well as
others are wholly without ideas of God and principles of morality, or
at least have but very ill ones; the reason in both cases being, that
they never employed their parts, faculties, and powers industriously
that way, but contented themselves with the opinions, fashions, and
things of their country, as they found them, without looking any
further. Had you or I been born at the Bay of Soldania, possibly our
thoughts and notions had not exceeded those brutish ones of the
Hottentots that inhabit there. And had the Virginia king Apochancana
been educated in England, he had been perhaps as knowing a divine, and
as good a mathematician as any in it; the difference between him and a
more improved Englishman lying barely in this, that the exercise of his
faculties was bounded within the ways, modes, and notions of his own
country, and never directed to any other or further inquiries. And if
he had not any idea of a God, it was only because he pursued not those
thoughts that would have led him to it.

13. Ideas of God various in different Men.

I grant that if there were any ideas to be found imprinted on the minds
of men, we have reason to expect it should be the notion of his Maker,
as a mark God set on his own workmanship, to mind man of his dependence
and duty; and that herein should appear the first instances of human
knowledge. But how late is it before any such notion is discoverable in
children? And when we find it there, how much more does it resemble the
opinion and notion of the teacher, than represent the true God? He that
shall observe in children the progress whereby their minds attain the
knowledge they have, will think that the objects they do first and most
familiarly converse with are those that make the first impressions on
their understandings; nor will he find the least footsteps of any
other. It is easy to take notice how their thoughts enlarge themselves,
only as they come to be acquainted with a greater variety of sensible
objects; to retain the ideas of them in their memories; and to get the
skill to compound and enlarge them, and several ways put them together.
How, by these means, they come to frame in their minds an idea men have
of a Deity, I shall hereafter show.

14. Contrary and inconsistent ideas of God under the same name.

Can it be thought that the ideas men have of God are the characters and
marks of himself, engraven in their minds by his own finger, when we
see that, in the same country, under one and the same name, men have
far different, nay often contrary and inconsistent ideas and
conceptions of him? Their agreeing in a name, or sound, will scarce
prove an innate notion of him.

15. Gross ideas of God.

What true or tolerable notion of a Deity could they have, who
acknowledged and worshipped hundreds? Every deity that they owned above
one was an infallible evidence of their ignorance of Him, and a proof
that they had no true notion of God, where unity, infinity, and
eternity were excluded. To which, if we add their gross conceptions of
corporeity, expressed in their images and representations of their
deities; the amours, marriages, copulations, lusts, quarrels, and other
mean qualities attributed by them to their gods; we shall have little
reason to think that the heathen world, i.e. the greatest part of
mankind, had such ideas of God in their minds as he himself, out of
care that they should not be mistaken about him, was author of. And
this universality of consent, so much argued, if it prove any native
impressions, it will be only this:—that God imprinted on the minds of
all men speaking the same language, a NAME for himself, but not any
IDEA; since those people who agreed in the name, had, at the same time,
far different apprehensions about the thing signified. If they say that
the variety of deities worshipped by the heathen world were but
figurative ways of expressing the several attributes of that
incomprehensible Being, or several parts of his providence, I answer:
what they might be in the original I will not here inquire; but that
they were so in the thoughts of the vulgar I think nobody will affirm.
And he that will consult the voyage of the Bishop of Beryte, c. 13,
(not to mention other testimonies,) will find that the theology of the
Siamites professedly owns a plurality of gods: or, as the Abbe de
Choisy more judiciously remarks in his Journal du Voyage de Siam,
107/177, it consists properly in acknowledging no God at all.

16. Idea of God not innate although wise men of all nations come to
have it.

If it be said, that wise men of all nations came to have true
conceptions of the unity and infinity of the Deity, I grant it. But
then this,

First, excludes universality of consent in anything but the name; for
those wise men being very few, perhaps one of a thousand, this
universality is very narrow.

Secondly, it seems to me plainly to prove, that the truest and best
notions men have of God were not imprinted, but acquired by thought and
meditation, and a right use of their faculties: since the wise and
considerate men of the world, by a right and careful employment of
their thoughts and reason, attained true notions in this as well as
other things; whilst the lazy and inconsiderate part of men, making far
the greater number, took up their notions by chance, from common
tradition and vulgar conceptions, without much beating their heads
about them. And if it be a reason to think the notion of God innate,
because all wise men had it, virtue too must be thought innate; for
that also wise men have always had.

17. Odd, low, and pitiful ideas of God common among men.

This was evidently the case of all Gentilism. Nor hath even amongst
Jews, Christians, and Mahometans, who acknowledged but one God, this
doctrine, and the care taken in those nations to teach men to have true
notions of a God, prevailed so far as to make men to have the same and
the true ideas of him. How many even amongst us, will be found upon
inquiry to fancy him in the shape of a man sitting in heaven; and to
have many other absurd and unfit conceptions of him? Christians as well
as Turks have had whole sects owning and contending earnestly for
it,—that the Deity was corporeal, and of human shape: and though we
find few now amongst us who profess themselves Anthropomorphites,
(though some I have met with that own it,) yet I believe he that will
make it his business may find amongst the ignorant and uninstructed
Christians many of that opinion. Talk but with country people, almost
of any age, or young people almost of any condition, and you shall find
that, though the name of God be frequently in their mouths, yet the
notions they apply this name to are so odd, low, and pitiful, that
nobody can imagine they were taught by a rational man; much less that
they were characters written by the finger of God himself. Nor do I see
how it derogates more from the goodness of God, that he has given us
minds unfurnished with these ideas of himself, than that he hath sent
us into the world with bodies unclothed; and that there is no art or
skill born with us. For, being fitted with faculties to attain these,
it is want of industry and consideration in us, and not of bounty in
him, if we have them not. It is as certain that there is a God, as that
the opposite angles made by the intersection of two straight lines are
equal. There was never any rational creature that set himself sincerely
to examine the truth of these propositions that could fail to assent to
them; though yet it be past doubt that there are many men, who, having
not applied their thoughts that way, are ignorant both of the one and
the other. If any one think fit to call this (which is the utmost of
its extent) UNIVERSAL CONSENT, such an one I easily allow; but such an
universal consent as this proves not the idea of God, any more than it
does the idea of such angles, innate.

18. If the Idea of God be not innate, no other can be supposed innate.

Since then though the knowledge of a God be the most natural discovery
of human reason, yet the idea of him is not innate, as I think is
evident from what has been said; I imagine there will be scarce any
other idea found that can pretend to it. Since if God hath set any
impression, any character, on the understanding of men, it is most
reasonable to expect it should have been some clear and uniform idea of
Himself; as far as our weak capacities were capable to receive so
incomprehensible and infinite an object. But our minds being at first
void of that idea which we are most concerned to have, it is a strong
presumption against all other innate characters. I must own, as far as
I can observe, I can find none, and would be glad to be informed by any
other.

19. Idea of Substance not innate.

I confess there is another idea which would be of general use for
mankind to have, as it is of general talk as if they had it; and that
is the idea of SUBSTANCE; which we neither have nor can have by
sensation or reflection. If nature took care to provide us any ideas,
we might well expect they should be such as by our own faculties we
cannot procure to ourselves; but we see, on the contrary, that since,
by those ways whereby other ideas are brought into our minds, this is
not, we have no such clear idea at all; and therefore signify nothing
by the word SUBSTANCE but only an uncertain supposition of we know not
what, i. e. of something whereof we have no idea, which we take to be
the substratum, or support, of those ideas we do know.

20. No Propositions can be innate, since no Ideas are innate.

Whatever then we talk of innate, either speculative or practical,
principles, it may with as much probability be said, that a man hath
100 pounds sterling in his pocket, and yet denied that he hath there
either penny, shilling, crown, or other coin out of which the sum is to
be made up; as to think that certain PROPOSITIONS are innate when the
IDEAS about which they are can by no means be supposed to be so. The
general reception and assent that is given doth not at all prove, that
the ideas expressed in them are innate; for in many cases, however the
ideas came there, the assent to words expressing the agreement or
disagreement of such ideas, will necessarily follow. Every one that
hath a true idea of GOD and WORSHIP, will assent to this proposition,
‘That God is to be worshipped,’ when expressed in a language he
understands; and every rational man that hath not thought on it to-day,
may be ready to assent to this proposition to-morrow; and yet millions
of men may be well supposed to want one or both those ideas to-day.
For, if we will allow savages, and most country people, to have ideas
of God and worship, (which conversation with them will not make one
forward to believe,) yet I think few children can be supposed to have
those ideas, which therefore they must begin to have some time or
other; and then they will also begin to assent to that proposition, and
make very little question of it ever after. But such an assent upon
hearing, no more proves the IDEAS to be innate, than it does that one
born blind (with cataracts which will be couched to-morrow) had the
innate ideas of the sun, or light, or saffron, or yellow; because, when
his sight is cleared, he will certainly assent to this proposition,
“That the sun is lucid, or that saffron is yellow.” And therefore, if
such an assent upon hearing cannot prove the ideas innate, it can much
less the PROPOSITIONS made up of those ideas. If they have any innate
ideas, I would be glad to be told what, and how many, they are.

21. No innate Ideas in the Memory.

To which let me add: if there be any innate ideas, any ideas in the
mind which the mind does not actually think on, they must be lodged in
the memory; and from thence must be brought into view by remembrance;
i. e. must be known, when they are remembered, to have been perceptions
in the mind before; unless remembrance can be without remembrance. For,
to remember is to perceive anything with memory, or with a
consciousness that it was perceived or known before. Without this,
whatever idea comes into the mind is new, and not remembered; this
consciousness of its having been in the mind before, being that which
distinguishes remembering from all other ways of thinking. Whatever
idea was never PERCEIVED by the mind was never in the mind. Whatever
idea is in the mind, is, either an actual perception, or else, having
been an actual perception, is so in the mind that, by the memory, it
can be made an actual perception again. Whenever there is the actual
perception of any idea without memory, the idea appears perfectly new
and unknown before to the understanding. Whenever the memory brings any
idea into actual view, it is with a consciousness that it had been
there before, and was not wholly a stranger to the mind. Whether this
be not so, I appeal to every one’s observation. And then I desire an
instance of an idea, pretended to be innate, which (before any
impression of it by ways hereafter to be mentioned) any one could
revive and remember, as an idea he had formerly known; without which
consciousness of a former perception there is no remembrance; and
whatever idea comes into the mind without THAT consciousness is not
remembered, or comes not out of the memory, nor can be said to be in
the mind before that appearance. For what is not either actually in
view or in the memory, is in the mind no way at all, and is all one as
if it had never been there. Suppose a child had the use of his eyes
till he knows and distinguishes colours; but then cataracts shut the
windows, and he is forty or fifty years perfectly in the dark; and in
that time perfectly loses all memory of the ideas of colours he once
had. This was the case of a blind man I once talked with, who lost his
sight by the small-pox when he was a child, and had no more notion of
colours than one born blind. I ask whether any one can say this man had
then any ideas of colours in his mind, any more than one born blind?
And I think nobody will say that either of them had in his mind any
ideas of colours at all. His cataracts are couched, and then he has the
ideas (which he remembers not) of colours, DE NOVO, by his restored
sight, conveyed to his mind, and that without any consciousness of a
former acquaintance. And these now he can revive and call to mind in
the dark. In this case all these ideas of colours which, when out of
view, can be revived with a consciousness of a former acquaintance,
being thus in the memory, are said to be in the mind. The use I make of
this is,—that whatever idea, being not actually in view, is in the
mind, is there only by being in the memory; and if it be not in the
memory, it is not in the mind; and if it be in the memory, it cannot by
the memory be brought into actual view without a perception that it
comes out of the memory; which is this, that it had been known before,
and is now remembered. If therefore there be any innate ideas, they
must be in the memory, or else nowhere in the mind; and if they be in
the memory, they can be revived without any impression from without;
and whenever they are brought into the mind they are remembered, i. e.
they bring with them a perception of their not being wholly new to it.
This being a constant and distinguishing difference between what is,
and what is not in the memory, or in the mind;—that what is not in the
memory, whenever it appears there, appears perfectly new and unknown
before; and what is in the memory, or in the mind, whenever it is
suggested by the memory, appears not to be new, but the mind finds it
in itself, and knows it was there before. By this it may be tried
whether there be any innate ideas in the mind before impression from
sensation or reflection. I would fain meet with the man who, when he
came to the use of reason, or at any other time, remembered any of
them; and to whom, after he was born, they were never new. If any one
will say, there are ideas in the mind that are NOT in the memory, I
desire him to explain himself, and make what he says intelligible.

22. Principles not innate, because of little use or little certainty.

Besides what I have already said, there is another reason why I doubt
that neither these nor any other principles are innate. I that am fully
persuaded that the infinitely wise God made all things in perfect
wisdom, cannot satisfy myself why he should be supposed to print upon
the minds of men some universal principles; whereof those that are
pretended innate, and concern SPECULATION, are of no great use; and
those that concern PRACTICE, not self-evident; and neither of them
distinguishable from some other truths not allowed to be innate. For,
to what purpose should characters be graven on the mind by the finger
of God, which are not clearer there than those which are afterwards
introduced, or cannot be distinguished from them? If any one thinks
there are such innate ideas and propositions, which by their clearness
and usefulness are distinguishable from all that is adventitious in the
mind and acquired, it will not be a hard matter for him to tell us
WHICH THEY ARE; and then every one will be a fit judge whether they be
so or no. Since if there be such innate ideas and impressions, plainly
different from all other perceptions and knowledge, every one will find
it true in himself. Of the evidence of these supposed innate maxims, I
have spoken already: of their usefulness I shall have occasion to speak
more hereafter.

23. Difference of Men’s Discoveries depends upon the different
Application of their Faculties.

To conclude: some ideas forwardly offer themselves to all men’s
understanding; and some sorts of truths result from any ideas, as soon
as the mind puts them into propositions: other truths require a train
of ideas placed in order, a due comparing of them, and deductions made
with attention, before they can be discovered and assented to. Some of
the first sort, because of their general and easy reception, have been
mistaken for innate: but the truth is, ideas and notions are no more
born with us than arts and sciences; though some of them indeed offer
themselves to our faculties more readily than others; and therefore are
more generally received: though that too be according as the organs of
our bodies and powers of our minds happen to be employed; God having
fitted men with faculties and means to discover, receive, and retain
truths, according as they are employed. The great difference that is to
be found in the notions of mankind is, from the different use they put
their faculties to. Whilst some (and those the most) taking things upon
trust, misemploy their power of assent, by lazily enslaving their minds
to the dictates and dominion of others, in doctrines which it is their
duty carefully to examine, and not blindly, with an implicit faith, to
swallow; others, employing their thoughts only about some few things,
grow acquainted sufficiently with them, attain great degrees of
knowledge in them, and are ignorant of all other, having never let
their thoughts loose in the search of other inquiries. Thus, that the
three angles of a triangle are quite equal to two right ones is a truth
as certain as anything can be, and I think more evident than many of
those propositions that go for principles; and yet there are millions,
however expert in other things, who know not this at all, because they
never set their thoughts on work about such angles. And he that
certainly knows this proposition may yet be utterly ignorant of the
truth of other propositions, in mathematics itself, which are as clear
and evident as this; because, in his search of those mathematical
truths, he stopped his thoughts short and went not so far. The same may
happen concerning the notions we have of the being of a Deity. For,
though there be no truth which a man may more evidently make out to
himself than the existence of a God, yet he that shall content himself
with things as he finds them in this world, as they minister to his
pleasures and passions, and not make inquiry a little further into
their causes, ends, and admirable contrivances, and pursue the thoughts
thereof with diligence and attention, may live long without any notion
of such a Being. And if any person hath by talk put such a notion into
his head, he may perhaps believe it; but if he hath never examined it,
his knowledge of it will be no perfecter than his, who having been
told, that the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right ones,
takes it upon trust, without examining the demonstration; and may yield
his assent as a probable opinion, but hath no knowledge of the truth of
it; which yet his faculties, if carefully employed, were able to make
clear and evident to him. But this only, by the by, to show how much
OUR KNOWLEDGE DEPENDS UPON THE RIGHT USE OF THOSE POWERS NATURE HATH
BESTOWED UPON US, and how little upon SUCH INNATE PRINCIPLES AS ARE IN
VAIN SUPPOSED TO BE IN ALL MANKIND FOR THEIR DIRECTION; which all men
could not but know if they were there, or else they would be there to
no purpose. And which since all men do not know, nor can distinguish
from other adventitious truths, we may well conclude there are no such.

24. Men must think and know for themselves.

What censure doubting thus of innate principles may deserve from men,
who will be apt to call it pulling up the old foundations of knowledge
and certainty, I cannot tell;—I persuade myself at least that the way I
have pursued, being conformable to truth, lays those foundations surer.
This I am certain, I have not made it my business either to quit or
follow any authority in the ensuing Discourse. Truth has been my only
aim; and wherever that has appeared to lead, my thoughts have
impartially followed, without minding whether the footsteps of any
other lay that way or not. Not that I want a due respect to other men’s
opinions; but, after all, the greatest reverence is due to truth: and I
hope it will not be thought arrogance to say, that perhaps we should
make greater progress in the discovery of rational and contemplative
knowledge, if we sought it in the fountain, IN THE CONSIDERATION OF
THINGS THEMSELVES; and made use rather of our own thoughts than other
men’s to find it. For I think we may as rationally hope to see with
other men’s eyes, as to know by other men’s understandings. So much as
we ourselves consider and comprehend of truth and reason, so much we
possess of real and true knowledge. The floating of other men’s
opinions in our brains, makes us not one jot the more knowing, though
they happen to be true. What in them was science, is in us but
opiniatrety; whilst we give up our assent only to reverend names, and
do not, as they did, employ our own reason to understand those truths
which gave them reputation. Aristotle was certainly a knowing man, but
nobody ever thought him so because he blindly embraced, and confidently
vented the opinions of another. And if the taking up of another’s
principles, without examining them, made not him a philosopher, I
suppose it will hardly make anybody else so. In the sciences, every one
has so much as he really knows and comprehends. What he believes only,
and takes upon trust, are but shreds; which, however well in the whole
piece, make no considerable addition to his stock who gathers them.
Such borrowed wealth, like fairy money, though it were gold in the hand
from which he received it, will be but leaves and dust when it comes to
use.

25. Whence the Opinion of Innate Principles.

When men have found some general propositions that could not be doubted
of as soon as understood, it was, I know, a short and easy way to
conclude them innate. This being once received, it eased the lazy from
the pains of search, and stopped the inquiry of the doubtful concerning
all that was once styled innate. And it was of no small advantage to
those who affected to be masters and teachers, to make this the
principle of principles,—THAT PRINCIPLES MUST NOT BE QUESTIONED. For,
having once established this tenet,—that there are innate principles,
it put their followers upon a necessity of receiving SOME doctrines as
such; which was to take them off from the use of their own reason and
judgment, and put them on believing and taking them upon trust without
further examination: in which posture of blind credulity, they might be
more easily governed by, and made useful to some sort of men, who had
the skill and office to principle and guide them. Nor is it a small
power it gives one man over another, to have the authority to be the
dictator of principles, and teacher of unquestionable truths; and to
make a man swallow that for an innate principle which may serve to his
purpose who teacheth them. Whereas had they examined the ways whereby
men came to the knowledge of many universal truths, they would have
found them to result in the minds of men from the being of things
themselves, when duly considered; and that they were discovered by the
application of those faculties that were fitted by nature to receive
and judge of them, when duly employed about them.

26. Conclusion.

To show HOW the understanding proceeds herein is the design of the
following Discourse; which I shall proceed to when I have first
premised, that hitherto,—to clear my way to those foundations which I
conceive are the only true ones, whereon to establish those notions we
can have of our own knowledge,—it hath been necessary for me to give an
account of the reasons I had to doubt of innate principles. And since
the arguments which are against them do, some of them, rise from common
received opinions, I have been forced to take several things for
granted; which is hardly avoidable to any one, whose task is to show
the falsehood or improbability of any tenet;—it happening in
controversial discourses as it does in assaulting of towns; where, if
the ground be but firm whereon the batteries are erected, there is no
further inquiry of whom it is borrowed, nor whom it belongs to, so it
affords but a fit rise for the present purpose. But in the future part
of this Discourse, designing to raise an edifice uniform and consistent
with itself, as far as my own experience and observation will assist
me, I hope to erect it on such a basis that I shall not need to shore
it up with props and buttresses, leaning on borrowed or begged
foundations: or at least, if mine prove a castle in the air, I will
endeavour it shall be all of a piece and hang together. Wherein I warn
the reader not to expect undeniable cogent demonstrations, unless I may
be allowed the privilege, not seldom assumed by others, to take my
principles for granted; and then, I doubt not, but I can demonstrate
too. All that I shall say for the principles I proceed on is, that I
can only appeal to men’s own unprejudiced experience and observation
whether they be true or not; and this is enough for a man who professes
no more than to lay down candidly and freely his own conjectures,
concerning a subject lying somewhat in the dark, without any other
design than an unbiassed inquiry after truth.




BOOK II
OF IDEAS




CHAPTER I.
OF IDEAS IN GENERAL, AND THEIR ORIGINAL.


1. Idea is the Object of Thinking.

Every man being conscious to himself that he thinks; and that which his
mind is applied about whilst thinking being the IDEAS that are there,
it is past doubt that men have in their minds several ideas,—such as
are those expressed by the words whiteness, hardness, sweetness,
thinking, motion, man, elephant, army, drunkenness, and others: it is
in the first place then to be inquired, HOW HE COMES BY THEM?

I know it is a received doctrine, that men have native ideas, and
original characters, stamped upon their minds in their very first
being. This opinion I have at large examined already; and, I suppose
what I have said in the foregoing Book will be much more easily
admitted, when I have shown whence the understanding may get all the
ideas it has; and by what ways and degrees they may come into the
mind;—for which I shall appeal to every one’s own observation and
experience.

2. All Ideas come from Sensation or Reflection.

Let us then suppose the mind to be, as we say, white paper, void of all
characters, without any ideas:—How comes it to be furnished? Whence
comes it by that vast store which the busy and boundless fancy of man
has painted on it with an almost endless variety? Whence has it all the
MATERIALS of reason and knowledge? To this I answer, in one word, from
EXPERIENCE. In that all our knowledge is founded; and from that it
ultimately derives itself. Our observation employed either, about
external sensible objects, or about the internal operations of our
minds perceived and reflected on by ourselves, is that which supplies
our understandings with all the MATERIALS of thinking. These two are
the fountains of knowledge, from whence all the ideas we have, or can
naturally have, do spring.

3. The Objects of Sensation one Source of Ideas

First, our Senses, conversant about particular sensible objects, do
convey into the mind several distinct perceptions of things, according
to those various ways wherein those objects do affect them. And thus we
come by those IDEAS we have of yellow, white, heat, cold, soft, hard,
bitter, sweet, and all those which we call sensible qualities; which
when I say the senses convey into the mind, I mean, they from external
objects convey into the mind what produces there those perceptions.
This great source of most of the ideas we have, depending wholly upon
our senses, and derived by them to the understanding, I call SENSATION.

4. The Operations of our Minds, the other Source of them.

Secondly, the other fountain from which experience furnisheth the
understanding with ideas is,—the perception of the operations of our
own mind within us, as it is employed about the ideas it has got;—which
operations, when the soul comes to reflect on and consider, do furnish
the understanding with another set of ideas, which could not be had
from things without. And such are perception, thinking, doubting,
believing, reasoning, knowing, willing, and all the different actings
of our own minds;—which we being conscious of, and observing in
ourselves, do from these receive into our understandings as distinct
ideas as we do from bodies affecting our senses. This source of ideas
every man has wholly in himself; and though it be not sense, as having
nothing to do with external objects, yet it is very like it, and might
properly enough be called INTERNAL SENSE. But as I call the other
Sensation, so I call this REFLECTION, the ideas it affords being such
only as the mind gets by reflecting on its own operations within
itself. By reflection then, in the following part of this discourse, I
would be understood to mean, that notice which the mind takes of its
own operations, and the manner of them, by reason whereof there come to
be ideas of these operations in the understanding. These two, I say,
viz. external material things, as the objects of SENSATION, and the
operations of our own minds within, as the objects of REFLECTION, are
to me the only originals from whence all our ideas take their
beginnings. The term OPERATIONS here I use in a large sense, as
comprehending not barely the actions of the mind about its ideas, but
some sort of passions arising sometimes from them, such as is the
satisfaction or uneasiness arising from any thought.

5. All our Ideas are of the one or of the other of these.

The understanding seems to me not to have the least glimmering of any
ideas which it doth not receive from one of these two. EXTERNAL OBJECTS
furnish the mind with the ideas of sensible qualities, which are all
those different perceptions they produce in us; and THE MIND furnishes
the understanding with ideas of its own operations.

These, when we have taken a full survey of them, and their several
modes, and the compositions made out of them we shall find to contain
all our whole stock of ideas; and that we have nothing in our minds
which did not come in one of these two ways. Let any one examine his
own thoughts, and thoroughly search into his understanding; and then
let him tell me, whether all the original ideas he has there, are any
other than of the objects of his senses, or of the operations of his
mind, considered as objects of his reflection. And how great a mass of
knowledge soever he imagines to be lodged there, he will, upon taking a
strict view, see that he has not any idea in his mind but what one of
these two have imprinted;—though perhaps, with infinite variety
compounded and enlarged by the understanding, as we shall see
hereafter.

6. Observable in Children.

He that attentively considers the state of a child, at his first coming
into the world, will have little reason to think him stored with plenty
of ideas, that are to be the matter of his future knowledge. It is BY
DEGREES he comes to be furnished with them. And though the ideas of
obvious and familiar qualities imprint themselves before the memory
begins to keep a register of time or order, yet it is often so late
before some unusual qualities come in the way, that there are few men
that cannot recollect the beginning of their acquaintance with them.
And if it were worth while, no doubt a child might be so ordered as to
have but a very few, even of the ordinary ideas, till he were grown up
to a man. But all that are born into the world, being surrounded with
bodies that perpetually and diversely affect them, variety of ideas,
whether care be taken of it or not, are imprinted on the minds of
children. Light and colours are busy at hand everywhere, when the eye
is but open; sounds and some tangible qualities fail not to solicit
their proper senses, and force an entrance to the mind;—but yet, I
think, it will be granted easily, that if a child were kept in a place
where he never saw any other but black and white till he were a man, he
would have no more ideas of scarlet or green, than he that from his
childhood never tasted an oyster, or a pine-apple, has of those
particular relishes.

7. Men are differently furnished with these, according to the different
Objects they converse with.

Men then come to be furnished with fewer or more simple ideas from
without, according as the objects they converse with afford greater or
less variety; and from the operations of their minds within, according
as they more or less reflect on them. For, though he that contemplates
the operations of his mind, cannot but have plain and clear ideas of
them; yet, unless he turn his thoughts that way, and considers them
ATTENTIVELY, he will no more have clear and distinct ideas of all the
operations of his mind, and all that may be observed therein, than he
will have all the particular ideas of any landscape, or of the parts
and motions of a clock, who will not turn his eyes to it, and with
attention heed all the parts of it. The picture, or clock may be so
placed, that they may come in his way every day; but yet he will have
but a confused idea of all the parts they are made up of, till he
applies himself with attention, to consider them each in particular.

8. Ideas of Reflection later, because they need Attention.

And hence we see the reason why it is pretty late before most children
get ideas of the operations of their own minds; and some have not any
very clear or perfect ideas of the greatest part of them all their
lives. Because, though they pass there continually, yet, like floating
visions, they make not deep impressions enough to leave in their mind
clear, distinct, lasting ideas, till the understanding turns inward
upon itself, reflects on its own operations, and makes them the objects
of its own contemplation. Children when they come first into it, are
surrounded with a world of new things which, by a constant solicitation
of their senses, draw the mind constantly to them; forward to take
notice of new, and apt to be delighted with the variety of changing
objects. Thus the first years are usually employed and diverted in
looking abroad. Men’s business in them is to acquaint themselves with
what is to be found without; and so growing up in a constant attention
to outward sensations, seldom make any considerable reflection on what
passes within them, till they come to be of riper years; and some
scarce ever at all.

9. The Soul begins to have Ideas when it begins to perceive.

To ask, at what TIME a man has first any ideas, is to ask, when he
begins to perceive;—HAVING IDEAS, and PERCEPTION, being the same thing.
I know it is an opinion, that the soul always thinks, and that it has
the actual perception of ideas in itself constantly, as long as it
exists; and that actual thinking is as inseparable from the soul as
actual extension is from the body; which if true, to inquire after the
beginning of a man’s ideas is the same as to inquire after the
beginning of his soul. For, by this account, soul and its ideas, as
body and its extension, will begin to exist both at the same time.

10. The Soul thinks not always; for this wants Proofs.

But whether the soul be supposed to exist antecedent to, or coeval
with, or some time after the first rudiments of organization, or the
beginnings of life in the body, I leave to be disputed by those who
have better thought of that matter. I confess myself to have one of
those dull souls, that doth not perceive itself always to contemplate
ideas; nor can conceive it any more necessary for the soul always to
think, than for the body always to move: the perception of ideas being
(as I conceive) to the soul, what motion is to the body; not its
essence, but one of its operations. And therefore, though thinking be
supposed never so much the proper action of the soul, yet it is not
necessary to suppose that it should be always thinking, always in
action. That, perhaps, is the privilege of the infinite Author and
Preserver of all things, who “never slumbers nor sleeps”; but is not
competent to any finite being, at least not to the soul of man. We know
certainly, by experience, that we SOMETIMES think; and thence draw this
infallible consequence,—that there is something in us that has a power
to think. But whether that substance PERPETUALLY thinks or no, we can
be no further assured than experience informs us. For, to say that
actual thinking is essential to the soul, and inseparable from it, is
to beg what is in question, and not to prove it by reason;—which is
necessary to be done, if it be not a self-evident proposition. But
whether this, “That the soul always thinks,” be a self-evident
proposition, that everybody assents to at first hearing, I appeal to
mankind. It is doubted whether I thought at all last night or no. The
question being about a matter of fact, it is begging it to bring, as a
proof for it, an hypothesis, which is the very thing in dispute: by
which way one may prove anything, and it is but supposing that all
watches, whilst the balance beats, think, and it is sufficiently
proved, and past doubt, that my watch thought all last night. But he
that would not deceive himself, ought to build his hypothesis on matter
of fact, and make it out by sensible experience, and not presume on
matter of fact, because of his hypothesis, that is, because he supposes
it to be so; which way of proving amounts to this, that I must
necessarily think all last night, because another supposes I always
think, though I myself cannot perceive that I always do so.

But men in love with their opinions may not only suppose what is in
question, but allege wrong matter of fact. How else could any one make
it an inference of mine, that a thing is not, because we are not
sensible of it in our sleep? I do not say there is no SOUL in a man,
because he is not sensible of it in his sleep; but I do say, he cannot
THINK at any time, waking or sleeping, without being sensible of it.
Our being sensible of it is not necessary to anything but to our
thoughts; and to them it is; and to them it always will be necessary,
till we can think without being conscious of it.

11. It is not always conscious of it.

I grant that the soul, in a waking man, is never without thought,
because it is the condition of being awake. But whether sleeping
without dreaming be not an affection of the whole man, mind as well as
body, may be worth a waking man’s consideration; it being hard to
conceive that anything should think and not be conscious of it. If the
soul doth think in a sleeping man without being conscious of it, I ask
whether, during such thinking, it has any pleasure or pain, or be
capable of happiness or misery? I am sure the man is not; no more than
the bed or earth he lies on. For to be happy or miserable without being
conscious of it, seems to me utterly inconsistent and impossible. Or if
it be possible that the SOUL can, whilst the body is sleeping, have its
thinking, enjoyments, and concerns, its pleasures or pain, apart, which
the MAN is not conscious of nor partakes in,—it is certain that
Socrates asleep and Socrates awake is not the same person; but his soul
when he sleeps, and Socrates the man, consisting of body and soul, when
he is waking, are two persons: since waking Socrates has no knowledge
of, or concernment for that happiness or misery of his soul, which it
enjoys alone by itself whilst he sleeps, without perceiving anything of
it; no more than he has for the happiness or misery of a man in the
Indies, whom he knows not. For, if we take wholly away all
consciousness of our actions and sensations, especially of pleasure and
pain, and the concernment that accompanies it, it will be hard to know
wherein to place personal identity.

12. If a sleeping Man thinks without knowing it, the sleeping and
waking Man are two Persons.

The soul, during sound sleep, thinks, say these men. Whilst it thinks
and perceives, it is capable certainly of those of delight or trouble,
as well as any other perceptions; and IT must necessarily be CONSCIOUS
of its own perceptions. But it has all this apart: the sleeping MAN, it
is plain, is conscious of nothing of all this. Let us suppose, then,
the soul of Castor, while he is sleeping, retired from his body; which
is no impossible supposition for the men I have here to do with, who so
liberally allow life, without a thinking soul, to all other animals.
These men cannot then judge it impossible, or a contradiction, that the
body should live without the soul; nor that the soul should subsist and
think, or have perception, even perception of happiness or misery,
without the body. Let us then, I say, suppose the soul of Castor
separated during his sleep from his body, to think apart. Let us
suppose, too, that it chooses for its scene of thinking the body of
another man, v. g. Pollux, who is sleeping without a soul. For, if
Castor’s soul can think, whilst Castor is asleep, what Castor is never
conscious of, it is no matter what PLACE it chooses to think in. We
have here, then, the bodies of two men with only one soul between them,
which we will suppose to sleep and wake by turns; and the soul still
thinking in the waking man, whereof the sleeping man is never
conscious, has never the least perception. I ask, then, whether Castor
and Pollux, thus with only one soul between them, which thinks and
perceives in one what the other is never conscious of, nor is concerned
for, are not two as distinct PERSONS as Castor and Hercules, or as
Socrates and Plato were? And whether one of them might not be very
happy, and the other very miserable? Just by the same reason, they make
the soul and the man two persons, who make the soul think apart what
the man is not conscious of. For, I suppose nobody will make identity
of persons to consist in the soul’s being united to the very same
numerical particles of matter. For if that be necessary to identity, it
will be impossible, in that constant flux of the particles of our
bodies, that any man should be the same person two days, or two
moments, together.

13. Impossible to convince those that sleep without dreaming, that they
think.

Thus, methinks, every drowsy nod shakes their doctrine, who teach that
the soul is always thinking. Those, at least, who do at any time SLEEP
WITHOUT DREAMING, can never be convinced that their thoughts are
sometimes for four hours busy without their knowing of it; and if they
are taken in the very act, waked in the middle of that sleeping
contemplation, can give no manner of account of it.

14. That men dream without remembering it, in vain urged.

It will perhaps be said,—That the soul thinks even in the soundest
sleep, but the MEMORY retains it not. That the soul in a sleeping man
should be this moment busy a thinking, and the next moment in a waking
man not remember nor be able to recollect one jot of all those
thoughts, is very hard to be conceived, and would need some better
proof than bare assertion to make it be believed. For who can without
any more ado, but being barely told so, imagine that the greatest part
of men do, during all their lives, for several hours every day, think
of something, which if they were asked, even in the middle of these
thoughts, they could remember nothing at all of? Most men, I think,
pass a great part of their sleep without dreaming. I once knew a man
that was bred a scholar, and had no bad memory, who told me he had
never dreamed in his life, till he had that fever he was then newly
recovered of, which was about the five or six and twentieth year of his
age. I suppose the world affords more such instances: at least every
one’s acquaintance will furnish him with examples enough of such as
pass most of their nights without dreaming.

15. Upon this Hypothesis, the Thoughts of a sleeping Man ought to be
most rational.

To think often, and never to retain it so much as one moment, is a very
useless sort of thinking; and the soul, in such a state of thinking,
does very little, if at all, excel that of a looking-glass, which
constantly receives variety of images, or ideas, but retains none; they
disappear and vanish, and there remain no footsteps of them; the
looking-glass is never the better for such ideas, nor the soul for such
thoughts. Perhaps it will be said, that in a waking MAN the materials
of the body are employed, and made use of, in thinking; and that the
memory of thoughts is retained by the impressions that are made on the
brain, and the traces there left after such thinking; but that in the
thinking of the SOUL, which is not perceived in a sleeping man, there
the soul thinks apart, and making no use of the organs of the body,
leaves no impressions on it, and consequently no memory of such
thoughts. Not to mention again the absurdity of two distinct persons,
which follows from this supposition, I answer, further,—That whatever
ideas the mind can receive and contemplate without the help of the
body, it is reasonable to conclude it can retain without the help of
the body too; or else the soul, or any separate spirit, will have but
little advantage by thinking. If it has no memory of its own thoughts;
if it cannot lay them up for its own use, and be able to recall them
upon occasion; if it cannot reflect upon what is past, and make use of
its former experiences, reasonings, and contemplations, to what purpose
does it think? They who make the soul a thinking thing, at this rate,
will not make it a much more noble being than those do whom they
condemn, for allowing it to be nothing but the subtilist parts of
matter. Characters drawn on dust, that the first breath of wind
effaces; or impressions made on a heap of atoms, or animal spirits, are
altogether as useful, and render the subject as noble, as the thoughts
of a soul that perish in thinking; that, once out of sight, are gone
for ever, and leave no memory of themselves behind them. Nature never
makes excellent things for mean or no uses: and it is hardly to be
conceived that our infinitely wise Creator should make so admirable a
faculty as the power of thinking, that faculty which comes nearest the
excellency of his own incomprehensible being, to be so idly and
uselessly employed, at least a fourth part of its time here, as to
think constantly, without remembering any of those thoughts, without
doing any good to itself or others, or being any way useful to any
other part of the creation. If we will examine it, we shall not find, I
suppose, the motion of dull and senseless matter, any where in the
universe, made so little use of and so wholly thrown away.

16. On this Hypothesis, the Soul must have Ideas not derived from
Sensation or Reflection, of which there is no Appearance.

It is true, we have sometimes instances of perception whilst we are
asleep, and retain the memory of those thoughts: but how extravagant
and incoherent for the most part they are; how little conformable to
the perfection and order of a rational being, those who are acquainted
with dreams need not be told. This I would willingly be satisfied
in,—whether the soul, when it thinks thus apart, and as it were
separate from the body, acts less rationally than when conjointly with
it, or no. If its separate thoughts be less rational, then these men
must say, that the soul owes the perfection of rational thinking to the
body: if it does not, it is a wonder that our dreams should be, for the
most part, so frivolous and irrational; and that the soul should retain
none of its more rational soliloquies and meditations.

17. If I think when I know it not, nobody else can know it.

Those who so confidently tell us that the soul always actually thinks,
I would they would also tell us, what those ideas are that are in the
soul of a child, before or just at the union with the body, before it
hath received any by sensation. The dreams of sleeping men are, as I
take it, all made up of the waking man’s ideas; though for the most
part oddly put together. It is strange, if the soul has ideas of its
own that it derived not from sensation or reflection, (as it must have,
if it thought before it received any impressions from the body,) that
it should never, in its private thinking, (so private, that the man
himself perceives it not,) retain any of them the very moment it wakes
out of them, and then make the man glad with new discoveries. Who can
find it reason that the soul should, in its retirement during sleep,
have so many hours’ thoughts, and yet never light on any of those ideas
it borrowed not from sensation or reflection; or at least preserve the
memory of none but such, which, being occasioned from the body, must
needs be less natural to a spirit? It is strange the soul should never
once in a man’s whole life recall over any of its pure native thoughts,
and those ideas it had before it borrowed anything from the body; never
bring into the waking man’s view any other ideas but what have a tang
of the cask, and manifestly derive their original from that union. If
it always thinks, and so had ideas before it was united, or before it
received any from the body, it is not to be supposed but that during
sleep it recollects its native ideas; and during that retirement from
communicating with the body, whilst it thinks by itself, the ideas it
is busied about should be, sometimes at least, those more natural and
congenial ones which it had in itself, underived from the body, or its
own operations about them: which, since the waking man never remembers,
we must from this hypothesis conclude either that the soul remembers
something that the man does not; or else that memory belongs only to
such ideas as are derived from the body, or the mind’s operations about
them.

18. How knows any one that the Soul always thinks? For if it be not a
self-evident Proposition, it needs Proof.

I would be glad also to learn from these men who so confidently
pronounce that the human soul, or, which is all one, that a man always
thinks, how they come to know it; nay, how they come to know that they
themselves think, when they themselves do not perceive it. This, I am
afraid, is to be sure without proofs, and to know without perceiving.
It is, I suspect, a confused notion, taken up to serve an hypothesis;
and none of those clear truths, that either their own evidence forces
us to admit, or common experience makes it impudence to deny. For the
most that can be said of it is, that it is possible the soul may always
think, but not always retain it in memory. And I say, it is as possible
that the soul may not always think; and much more probable that it
should sometimes not think, than that it should often think, and that a
long while together, and not be conscious to itself, the next moment
after, that it had thought.

19. That a Man should be busy in Thinking, and yet not retain it the
next moment, very improbable.

To suppose the soul to think, and the man not to perceive it, is, as
has been said, to make two persons in one man. And if one considers
well these men’s way of speaking, one should be led into a suspicion
that they do so. For those who tell us that the SOUL always thinks, do
never, that I remember, say that a MAN always thinks. Can the soul
think, and not the man? Or a man think, and not be conscious of it?
This, perhaps, would be suspected of jargon in others. If they say the
man thinks always, but is not always conscious of it, they may as well
say his body is extended without having parts. For it is altogether as
intelligible to say that a body is extended without parts, as that
anything thinks without being conscious of it, or perceiving that it
does so. They who talk thus may, with as much reason, if it be
necessary to their hypothesis, say that a man is always hungry, but
that he does not always feel it; whereas hunger consists in that very
sensation, as thinking consists in being conscious that one thinks. If
they say that a man is always conscious to himself of thinking, I ask,
How they know it? Consciousness is the perception of what passes in a
man’s own mind. Can another man perceive that I am conscious of
anything, when I perceive it not myself? No man’s knowledge here can go
beyond his experience. Wake a man out of a sound sleep, and ask him
what he was that moment thinking of. If he himself be conscious of
nothing he then thought on, he must be a notable diviner of thoughts
that can assure him that he was thinking. May he not, with more reason,
assure him he was not asleep? This is something beyond philosophy; and
it cannot be less than revelation, that discovers to another thoughts
in my mind, when I can find none there myself. And they must needs have
a penetrating sight who can certainly see that I think, when I cannot
perceive it myself, and when I declare that I do not; and yet can see
that dogs or elephants do not think, when they give all the
demonstration of it imaginable, except only telling us that they do so.
This some may suspect to be a step beyond the Rosicrucians; it seeming
easier to make one’s self invisible to others, than to make another’s
thoughts visible to me, which are not visible to himself. But it is but
defining the soul to be “a substance that always thinks,” and the
business is done. If such definition be of any authority, I know not
what it can serve for but to make many men suspect that they have no
souls at all; since they find a good part of their lives pass away
without thinking. For no definitions that I know, no suppositions of
any sect, are of force enough to destroy constant experience; and
perhaps it is the affectation of knowing beyond what we perceive, that
makes so much useless dispute and noise in the world.

20. No ideas but from Sensation and Reflection, evident, if we observe
Children.

I see no reason, therefore, to believe that the soul thinks before the
senses have furnished it with ideas to think on; and as those are
increased and retained, so it comes, by exercise, to improve its
faculty of thinking in the several parts of it; as well as, afterwards,
by compounding those ideas, and reflecting on its own operations, it
increases its stock, as well as facility in remembering, imagining,
reasoning, and other modes of thinking.

21. State of a child in the mother’s womb.

He that will suffer himself to be informed by observation and
experience, and not make his own hypothesis the rule of nature, will
find few signs of a soul accustomed to much thinking in a new-born
child, and much fewer of any reasoning at all. And yet it is hard to
imagine that the rational soul should think so much, and not reason at
all. And he that will consider that infants newly come into the world
spend the greatest part of their time in sleep, and are seldom awake
but when either hunger calls for the teat, or some pain (the most
importunate of all sensations), or some other violent impression on the
body, forces the mind to perceive and attend to it;—he, I say, who
considers this, will perhaps find reason to imagine that a Fœtus in the
mother’s womb differs not much from the state of a vegetable, but
passes the greatest part of its time without perception or thought;
doing very little but sleep in a place where it needs not seek for
food, and is surrounded with liquor, always equally soft, and near of
the same temper; where the eyes have no light, and the ears so shut up
are not very susceptible of sounds; and where there is little or no
variety, or change of objects, to move the senses.

22. The mind thinks in proportion to the matter it gets from experience
to think about.

Follow a child from its birth, and observe the alterations that time
makes, and you shall find, as the mind by the senses comes more and
more to be furnished with ideas, it comes to be more and more awake;
thinks more, the more it has matter to think on. After some time it
begins to know the objects which, being most familiar with it, have
made lasting impressions. Thus it comes by degrees to know the persons
it daily converses with, and distinguishes them from strangers; which
are instances and effects of its coming to retain and distinguish the
ideas the senses convey to it. And so we may observe how the mind, BY
DEGREES, improves in these; and ADVANCES to the exercise of those other
faculties of enlarging, compounding, and abstracting its ideas, and of
reasoning about them, and reflecting upon all these; of which I shall
have occasion to speak more hereafter.

23. A man begins to have ideas when he first has sensation. What
sensation is.

If it shall be demanded then, WHEN a man BEGINS to have any ideas, I
think the true answer is,—WHEN HE FIRST HAS ANY SENSATION. For, since
there appear not to be any ideas in the mind before the senses have
conveyed any in, I conceive that ideas in the understanding are coeval
with SENSATION; WHICH IS SUCH AN IMPRESSION OR MOTION MADE IN SOME PART
OF THE BODY, AS MAKES IT BE TAKEN NOTICE OF IN THE UNDERSTANDING.

24. The Original of all our Knowledge.

The impressions then that are made on our sense by outward objects that
are extrinsical to the mind; and its own operations about these
impressions, reflected on by itself, as proper objects to be
contemplated by it, are, I conceive, the original of all knowledge.
Thus the first capacity of human intellect is,—that the mind is fitted
to receive the impressions made on it; either through the senses by
outward objects, or by its own operations when it reflects on them.
This is the first step a man makes towards the discovery of anything,
and the groundwork whereon to build all those notions which ever he
shall have naturally in this world. All those sublime thoughts which
tower above the clouds, and reach as high as heaven itself, take their
rise and footing here: in all that great extent wherein the mind
wanders, in those remote speculations it may seem to be elevated with,
it stirs not one jot beyond those ideas which SENSE or REFLECTION have
offered for its contemplation.

25. In the Reception of simple Ideas, the Understanding is for the most
part passive.

In this part the understanding is merely passive; and whether or no it
will have these beginnings, and as it were materials of knowledge, is
not in its own power. For the objects of our senses do, many of them,
obtrude their particular ideas upon our minds whether we will or not;
and the operations of our minds will not let us be without, at least,
some obscure notions of them. No man can be wholly ignorant of what he
does when he thinks. These simple ideas, when offered to the mind, the
understanding can no more refuse to have, nor alter when they are
imprinted, nor blot them out and make new ones itself, than a mirror
can refuse, alter, or obliterate the images or ideas which the objects
set before it do therein produce. As the bodies that surround us do
diversely affect our organs, the mind is forced to receive the
impressions; and cannot avoid the perception of those ideas that are
annexed to them.




CHAPTER II.
OF SIMPLE IDEAS.


1. Uncompounded Appearances.

The better to understand the nature, manner, and extent of our
knowledge, one thing is carefully to be observed concerning the ideas
we have; and that is, that some of them, are SIMPLE and some COMPLEX.

Though the qualities that affect our senses are, in the things
themselves, so united and blended, that there is no separation, no
distance between them; yet it is plain, the ideas they produce in the
mind enter by the senses simple; and unmixed. For, though the sight and
touch often take in from the same object, at the same time, different
ideas;—as a man sees at once motion and colour; the hand feels softness
and warmth in the same piece of wax: yet the simple ideas thus united
in the same subject, are as perfectly distinct as those that come in by
different senses. The coldness and hardness which a man feels in a
piece of ice being as distinct ideas in the mind as the smell and
whiteness of a lily; or as the taste of sugar, and smell of a rose. And
there is nothing can be plainer to a man than the clear and distinct
perception he has of those simple ideas; which, being each in itself
uncompounded, contains in it nothing but ONE UNIFORM APPEARANCE, OR
CONCEPTION IN THE MIND, and is not distinguishable into different
ideas.

2. The Mind can neither make nor destroy them.

These simple ideas, the materials of all our knowledge, are suggested
and furnished to the mind only by those two ways above mentioned, viz.
sensation and reflection. When the understanding is once stored with
these simple ideas, it has the power to repeat, compare, and unite
them, even to an almost infinite variety, and so can make at pleasure
new complex ideas. But it is not in the power of the most exalted wit,
or enlarged understanding, by any quickness or variety of thought, to
INVENT or FRAME one new simple idea in the mind, not taken in by the
ways before mentioned: nor can any force of the understanding DESTROY
those that are there. The dominion of man, in this little world of his
own understanding being much what the same as it is in the great world
of visible things; wherein his power, however managed by art and skill,
reaches no farther than to compound and divide the materials that are
made to his hand; but can do nothing towards the making the least
particle of new matter, or destroying one atom of what is already in
being. The same inability will every one find in himself, who shall go
about to fashion in his understanding one simple idea, not received in
by his senses from external objects, or by reflection from the
operations of his own mind about them. I would have any one try to
fancy any taste which had never affected his palate; or frame the idea
of a scent he had never smelt: and when he can do this, I will also
conclude that a blind man hath ideas of colours, and a deaf man true
distinct notions of sounds.

3. Only the qualities that affect the senses are imaginable.

This is the reason why—though we cannot believe it impossible to God to
make a creature with other organs, and more ways to convey into the
understanding the notice of corporeal things than those five, as they
are usually counted, which he has given to man—yet I think it is not
possible for any MAN to imagine any other qualities in bodies,
howsoever constituted, whereby they can be taken notice of, besides
sounds, tastes, smells, visible and tangible qualities. And had mankind
been made but with four senses, the qualities then which are the
objects of the fifth sense had been as far from our notice,
imagination, and conception, as now any belonging to a sixth, seventh,
or eighth sense can possibly be;—which, whether yet some other
creatures, in some other parts of this vast and stupendous universe,
may not have, will be a great presumption to deny. He that will not set
himself proudly at the top of all things, but will consider the
immensity of this fabric, and the great variety that is to be found in
this little and inconsiderable part of it which he has to do with, may
be apt to think that, in other mansions of it, there may be other and
different intelligent beings, of whose faculties he has as little
knowledge or apprehension as a worm shut up in one drawer of a cabinet
hath of the senses or understanding of a man; such variety and
excellency being suitable to the wisdom and power of the Maker. I have
here followed the common opinion of man’s having but five senses;
though, perhaps, there may be justly counted more;—but either
supposition serves equally to my present purpose.




CHAPTER III.
OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF SENSE.


1. Division of simple ideas.

The better to conceive the ideas we receive from sensation, it may not
be amiss for us to consider them, in reference to the different ways
whereby they make their approaches to our minds, and make themselves
perceivable by us.

FIRST, then, There are some which come into our minds BY ONE SENSE
ONLY.

SECONDLY, There are others that convey themselves into the mind BY MORE
SENSES THAN ONE.

THIRDLY, Others that are had from REFLECTION ONLY.

FOURTHLY, There are some that make themselves way, and are suggested to
the mind BY ALL THE WAYS OF SENSATION AND REFLECTION.

We shall consider them apart under these several heads.

Ideas of one Sense.

There are some ideas which have admittance only through one sense,
which is peculiarly adapted to receive them. Thus light and colours, as
white, red, yellow, blue; with their several degrees or shades and
mixtures, as green, scarlet, purple, sea-green, and the rest, come in
only by the eyes. All kinds of noises, sounds, and tones, only by the
ears. The several tastes and smells, by the nose and palate. And if
these organs, or the nerves which are the conduits to convey them from
without to their audience in the brain,—the mind’s presence-room (as I
may so call it)—are any of them so disordered as not to perform their
functions, they have no postern to be admitted by; no other way to
bring themselves into view, and be perceived by the understanding.

The most considerable of those belonging to the touch, are heat and
cold, and solidity: all the rest, consisting almost wholly in the
sensible configuration, as smooth and rough; or else, more or less firm
adhesion of the parts, as hard and soft, tough and brittle, are obvious
enough.

2. Few simple Ideas have Names.

I think it will be needless to enumerate all the particular simple
ideas belonging to each sense. Nor indeed is it possible if we would;
there being a great many more of them belonging to most of the senses
than we have names for. The variety of smells, which are as many
almost, if not more, than species of bodies in the world, do most of
them want names. Sweet and stinking commonly serve our turn for these
ideas, which in effect is little more than to call them pleasing or
displeasing; though the smell of a rose and violet, both sweet, are
certainly very distinct ideas. Nor are the different tastes, that by
our palates we receive ideas of, much better provided with names.
Sweet, bitter, sour, harsh, and salt are almost all the epithets we
have to denominate that numberless variety of relishes, which are to be
found distinct, not only in almost every sort of creatures, but in the
different parts of the same plant, fruit, or animal. The same may be
said of colours and sounds. I shall, therefore, in the account of
simple ideas I am here giving, content myself to set down only such as
are most material to our present purpose, or are in themselves less apt
to be taken notice of though they are very frequently the ingredients
of our complex ideas; amongst which, I think, I may well account
solidity, which therefore I shall treat of in the next chapter.




CHAPTER IV.
IDEA OF SOLIDITY.


1. We receive this Idea from Touch.

The idea of SOLIDITY we receive by our touch: and it arises from the
resistance which we find in body to the entrance of any other body into
the place it possesses, till it has left it. There is no idea which we
receive more constantly from sensation than solidity. Whether we move
or rest, in what posture soever we are, we always feel something under
us that supports us, and hinders our further sinking downwards; and the
bodies which we daily handle make us perceive that, whilst they remain
between them, they do, by an insurmountable force, hinder the approach
of the parts of our hands that press them. THAT WHICH THUS HINDERS THE
APPROACH OF TWO BODIES, WHEN THEY ARE MOVED ONE TOWARDS ANOTHER, I CALL
SOLIDITY. I will not dispute whether this acceptation of the word solid
be nearer to its original signification than that which mathematicians
use it in. It suffices that I think the common notion of solidity will
allow, if not justify, this use of it; but if any one think it better
to call it IMPENETRABILITY, he has my consent. Only I have thought the
term solidity the more proper to express this idea, not only because of
its vulgar use in that sense, but also because it carries something
more of positive in it than impenetrability; which is negative, and is
perhaps more a consequence of solidity, than solidity itself. This, of
all other, seems the idea most intimately connected with, and essential
to body; so as nowhere else to be found or imagined, but only in
matter. And though our senses take no notice of it, but in masses of
matter, of a bulk sufficient to cause a sensation in us: yet the mind,
having once got this idea from such grosser sensible bodies, traces it
further, and considers it, as well as figure, in the minutest particle
of matter that can exist; and finds it inseparably inherent in body,
wherever or however modified.

2. Solidity fills Space.

This is the idea which belongs to body, whereby we conceive it to fill
space. The idea of which filling of space is,—that where we imagine any
space taken up by a solid substance, we conceive it so to possess it,
that it excludes all other solid substances; and will for ever hinder
any other two bodies, that move towards one another in a straight line,
from coming to touch one another, unless it removes from between them
in a line not parallel to that which they move in. This idea of it, the
bodies which we ordinarily handle sufficiently furnish us with.

3. Distinct from Space.

This resistance, whereby it keeps other bodies out of the space which
it possesses, is so great, that no force, how great soever, can
surmount it. All the bodies in the world, pressing a drop of water on
all sides, will never be able to overcome the resistance which it will
make, soft as it is, to their approaching one another, till it be
removed out of their way: whereby our idea of solidity is distinguished
both from pure space, which is capable neither of resistance nor
motion; and from the ordinary idea of hardness. For a man may conceive
two bodies at a distance, so as they may approach one another, without
touching or displacing any solid thing, till their superficies come to
meet; whereby, I think, we have the clear idea of space without
solidity. For (not to go so far as annihilation of any particular body)
I ask, whether a man cannot have the idea of the motion of one single
body alone, without any other succeeding immediately into its place? I
think it is evident he can: the idea of motion in one body no more
including the idea of motion in another, than the idea of a square
figure in one body includes the idea of a square figure in another. I
do not ask, whether bodies do so EXIST, that the motion of one body
cannot really be without the motion of another. To determine this
either way, is to beg the question for or against a VACUUM. But my
question is,—whether one cannot have the IDEA of one body moved, whilst
others are at rest? And I think this no one will deny. If so, then the
place it deserted gives us the idea of pure space without solidity;
whereinto any other body may enter, without either resistance or
protrusion of anything. When the sucker in a pump is drawn, the space
it filled in the tube is certainly the same whether any other body
follows the motion of the sucker or not: nor does it imply a
contradiction that, upon the motion of one body, another that is only
contiguous to it should not follow it. The necessity of such a motion
is built only on the supposition that the world is full; but not on the
distinct IDEAS of space and solidity, which are as different as
resistance and not resistance, protrusion and not protrusion. And that
men have ideas of space without a body, their very disputes about a
vacuum plainly demonstrate, as is shown in another place.

4. From Hardness.

Solidity is hereby also differenced from hardness, in that solidity
consists in repletion, and so an utter exclusion of other bodies out of
the space it possesses: but hardness, in a firm cohesion of the parts
of matter, making up masses of a sensible bulk, so that the whole does
not easily change its figure. And indeed, hard and soft are names that
we give to things only in relation to the constitutions of our own
bodies; that being generally called hard by us, which will put us to
pain sooner than change figure by the pressure of any part of our
bodies; and that, on the contrary, soft, which changes the situation of
its parts upon an easy and unpainful touch.

But this difficulty of changing the situation of the sensible parts
amongst themselves, or of the figure of the whole, gives no more
solidity to the hardest body in the world than to the softest; nor is
an adamant one jot more solid than water. For, though the two flat
sides of two pieces of marble will more easily approach each other,
between which there is nothing but water or air, than if there be a
diamond between them; yet it is not that the parts of the diamond are
more solid than those of water, or resist more; but because the parts
of water, being more easily separable from each other, they will, by a
side motion, be more easily removed, and give way to the approach of
the two pieces of marble. But if they could be kept from making place
by that side motion, they would eternally hinder the approach of these
two pieces of marble, as much as the diamond; and it would be as
impossible by any force to surmount their resistance, as to surmount
the resistance of the parts of a diamond. The softest body in the world
will as invincibly resist the coming together of any other two bodies,
if it be not put out of the way, but remain between them, as the
hardest that can be found or imagined. He that shall fill a yielding
soft body well with air or water, will quickly find its resistance. And
he that thinks that nothing but bodies that are hard can keep his hands
from approaching one another, may be pleased to make a trial, with the
air inclosed in a football. The experiment, I have been told, was made
at Florence, with a hollow globe of gold filled with water, and exactly
closed; which further shows the solidity of so soft a body as water.
For the golden globe thus filled, being put into a press, which was
driven by the extreme force of screws, the water made itself way
through the pores of that very close metal, and finding no room for a
nearer approach of its particles within, got to the outside, where it
rose like a dew, and so fell in drops, before the sides of the globe
could be made to yield to the violent compression of the engine that
squeezed it.

5. On Solidity depend Impulse, Resistance and Protrusion.

By this idea of solidity is the extension of body distinguished from
the extension of space:—the extension of body being nothing but the
cohesion or continuity of solid, separable, movable parts; and the
extension of space, the continuity of unsolid, inseparable, and
immovable parts. Upon the solidity of bodies also depend their mutual
impulse, resistance, and protrusion. Of pure space then, and solidity,
there are several (amongst which I confess myself one) who persuade
themselves they have clear and distinct ideas; and that they can think
on space, without anything in it that resists or is protruded by body.
This is the idea of pure space, which they think they have as clear as
any idea they can have of the extension of body: the idea of the
distance between the opposite parts of a concave superficies being
equally as clear without as with the idea of any solid parts between:
and on the other side, they persuade themselves that they have,
distinct from that of pure space, the idea of SOMETHING THAT FILLS
SPACE, that can be protruded by the impulse of other bodies, or resist
their motion. If there be others that have not these two ideas
distinct, but confound them, and make but one of them, I know not how
men, who have the same idea under different names, or different ideas
under the same name, can in that case talk with one another; any more
than a man who, not being blind or deaf, has distinct ideas of the
colour of scarlet and the sound of a trumpet, could discourse
concerning scarlet colour with the blind man I mentioned in another
place, who fancied that the idea of scarlet was like the sound of a
trumpet.

6. What Solidity is.

If any one asks me, WHAT THIS SOLIDITY IS, I send him to his senses to
inform him. Let him put a flint or a football between his hands, and
then endeavour to join them, and he will know. If he thinks this not a
sufficient explication of solidity, what it is, and wherein it
consists; I promise to tell him what it is, and wherein it consists,
when he tells me what thinking is, or wherein it consists; or explains
to me what extension or motion is, which perhaps seems much easier. The
simple ideas we have, are such as experience teaches them us; but if,
beyond that, we endeavour by words to make them clearer in the mind, we
shall succeed no better than if we went about to clear up the darkness
of a blind man’s mind by talking; and to discourse into him the ideas
of light and colours. The reason of this I shall show in another place.




CHAPTER V.
OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF DIVERS SENSES.


Ideas received both by seeing and touching.

The ideas we get by more than one sense are, of SPACE or EXTENSION,
FIGURE, REST, and MOTION. For these make perceivable impressions, both
on the eyes and touch; and we can receive and convey into our minds the
ideas of the extension, figure, motion, and rest of bodies, both by
seeing and feeling. But having occasion to speak more at large of these
in another place, I here only enumerate them.




CHAPTER VI.
OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF REFLECTION.


Simple Ideas are the Operations of Mind about its other Ideas.

The mind receiving the ideas mentioned in the foregoing chapters from
without, when it turns its view inward upon itself, and observes its
own actions about those ideas it has, takes from thence other ideas,
which are as capable to be the objects of its contemplation as any of
those it received from foreign things.

The Idea of Perception, and Idea of Willing, we have from Reflection.

The two great and principal actions of the mind, which are most
frequently considered, and which are so frequent that every one that
pleases may take notice of them in himself, are these two:—

PERCEPTION, or THINKING; and VOLITION, or WILLING.

The power of thinking is called the UNDERSTANDING, and the power of
volition is called the WILL; and these two powers or abilities in the
mind are denominated faculties.

Of some of the MODES of these simple ideas of reflection, such as are
REMEMBRANCE, DISCERNING, REASONING, JUDGING, KNOWLEDGE, FAITH, &c., I
shall have occasion to speak hereafter.




CHAPTER VII.
OF SIMPLE IDEAS OF BOTH SENSATION AND REFLECTION.


1. Ideas of Pleasure and Pain.

There be other simple ideas which convey themselves into the mind by
all the ways of sensation and reflection, _viz_.

_Pleasure_ or _Delight_, and its opposite,
_Pain_, or _Uneasiness;_
_Power;_
_Existence;_
_Unity_ mix with almost all our other Ideas.


2. Delight or uneasiness, one or other of them, join themselves to
almost all our ideas both of sensation and reflection: and there is
scarce any affection of our senses from without, any retired thought of
our mind within, which is not able to produce in us pleasure or pain.
By pleasure and pain, I would be understood to signify, whatsoever
delights or molests us; whether it arises from the thoughts of our
minds, or anything operating on our bodies. For, whether we call it;
satisfaction, delight, pleasure, happiness, &c., on the one side, or
uneasiness, trouble, pain, torment, anguish, misery, &c., the other,
they are still but different degrees of the same thing, and belong to
the ideas of pleasure and pain, delight or uneasiness; which are the
names I shall most commonly use for those two sorts of ideas.

3. As motives of our actions.

The infinite wise Author of our being, having given us the power over
several parts of our bodies, to move or keep them at rest as we think
fit; and also, by the motion of them, to move ourselves and other
contiguous bodies, in which consist all the actions of our body: having
also given a power to our minds, in several instances, to choose,
amongst its ideas, which it will think on, and to pursue the inquiry of
this or that subject with consideration and attention, to excite us to
these actions of thinking and motion that we are capable of,—has been
pleased to join to several thoughts, and several sensations a
perception of delight. If this were wholly separated from all our
outward sensations, and inward thoughts, we should have no reason to
prefer one thought or action to another; negligence to attention, or
motion to rest. And so we should neither stir our bodies, nor employ
our minds, but let our thoughts (if I may so call it) run adrift,
without any direction or design, and suffer the ideas of our minds,
like unregarded shadows, to make their appearances there, as it
happened, without attending to them. In which state man, however
furnished with the faculties of understanding and will, would be a very
idle, inactive creature, and pass his time only in a lazy, lethargic
dream. It has therefore pleased our wise Creator to annex to several
objects, and the ideas which we receive from them, as also to several
of our thoughts, a concomitant pleasure, and that in several objects,
to several degrees, that those faculties which he had endowed us with
might not remain wholly idle and unemployed by us.

4. An end and use of pain.

Pain has the same efficacy and use to set us on work that pleasure has,
we being as ready to employ our faculties to avoid that, as to pursue
this: only this is worth our consideration, that pain is often produced
by the same objects and ideas that produce pleasure in us. This their
near conjunction, which makes us often feel pain in the sensations
where we expected pleasure, gives us new occasion of admiring the
wisdom and goodness of our Maker, who, designing the preservation of
our being, has annexed pain to the application of many things to our
bodies, to warn us of the harm that they will do, and as advices to
withdraw from them. But he, not designing our preservation barely, but
the preservation of every part and organ in its perfection, hath in
many cases annexed pain to those very ideas which delight us. Thus
heat, that is very agreeable to us in one degree, by a little greater
increase of it proves no ordinary torment: and the most pleasant of all
sensible objects, light itself, if there be too much of it, if
increased beyond a due proportion to our eyes, causes a very painful
sensation. Which is wisely and favourably so ordered by nature, that
when any object does, by the vehemency of its operation, disorder the
instruments of sensation, whose structures cannot but be very nice and
delicate, we might, by the pain, be warned to withdraw, before the
organ be quite put out of order, and so be unfitted for its proper
function for the future. The consideration of those objects that
produce it may well persuade us, that this is the end or use of pain.
For, though great light be insufferable to our eyes, yet the highest
degree of darkness does not at all disease them: because that, causing
no disorderly motion in it, leaves that curious organ unharmed in its
natural state. But yet excess of cold as well as heat pains us: because
it is equally destructive to that temper which is necessary to the
preservation of life, and the exercise of the several functions of the
body, and which consists in a moderate degree of warmth; or, if you
please, a motion of the insensible parts of our bodies, confined within
certain bounds.

5. Another end.

Beyond all this, we may find another reason why God hath scattered up
and down several degrees of pleasure and pain, in all the things that
environ and affect us; and blended them together in almost all that our
thoughts and senses have to do with;—that we, finding imperfection,
dissatisfaction, and want of complete happiness, in all the enjoyments
which the creatures can afford us, might be led to seek it in the
enjoyment of Him with whom there is fullness of joy, and at whose right
hand are pleasures for evermore.

6. Goodness of God in annexing pleasure and pain to our other ideas.

Though what I have here said may not, perhaps, make the ideas of
pleasure and pain clearer to us than our own experience does, which is
the only way that we are capable of having them; yet the consideration
of the reason why they are annexed to so many other ideas, serving to
give us due sentiments of the wisdom and goodness of the Sovereign
Disposer of all things, may not be unsuitable to the main end of these
inquiries: the knowledge and veneration of him being the chief end of
all our thoughts, and the proper business of all understandings.

7. Ideas of Existence and Unity.

EXISTENCE and UNITY are two other ideas that are suggested to the
understanding by every object without, and every idea within. When
ideas are in our minds, we consider them as being actually there, as
well as we consider things to be actually without us;—which is, that
they exist, or have existence. And whatever we can consider as one
thing, whether a real being or idea, suggests to the understanding the
idea of unity.

8. Idea of Power.

POWER also is another of those simple ideas which we receive from
sensation and reflection. For, observing in ourselves that we do and
can think, and that we can at pleasure move several parts of our bodies
which were at rest; the effects, also, that natural bodies are able to
produce in one another, occurring every moment to our senses,—we both
these ways get the idea of power.

9. Idea of Succession.

Besides these there is another idea, which, though suggested by our
senses, yet is more constantly offered to us by what passes in our
minds; and that is the idea of SUCCESSION. For if we look immediately
into ourselves, and reflect on what is observable there, we shall find
our ideas always, whilst we are awake, or have any thought, passing in
train, one going and another coming, without intermission.

10. Simple Ideas the materials of all our Knowledge.

These, if they are not all, are at least (as I think) the most
considerable of those simple ideas which the mind has, out of which is
made all its other knowledge; all which it receives only by the two
forementioned ways of sensation and reflection.

Nor let any one think these too narrow bounds for the capacious mind of
man to expatiate in, which takes its flight further than the stars, and
cannot be confined by the limits of the world; that extends its
thoughts often even beyond the utmost expansion of Matter, and makes
excursions into that incomprehensible Inane. I grant all this, but
desire any one to assign any SIMPLE IDEA which is not received from one
of those inlets before mentioned, or any COMPLEX IDEA not made out of
those simple ones. Nor will it be so strange to think these few simple
ideas sufficient to employ the quickest thought, or largest capacity;
and to furnish the materials of all that various knowledge, and more
various fancies and opinions of all mankind, if we consider how many
words may be made out of the various composition of twenty-four
letters; or if, going one step further, we will but reflect on the
variety of combinations that may be made with barely one of the
above-mentioned ideas, viz. number, whose stock is inexhaustible and
truly infinite: and what a large and immense field doth extension alone
afford the mathematicians?




CHAPTER VIII.
SOME FURTHER CONSIDERATIONS CONCERNING OUR SIMPLE IDEAS OF SENSATION.


1. Positive Ideas from privative causes.

Concerning the simple ideas of Sensation; it is to be considered,—that
whatsoever is so constituted in nature as to be able, by affecting our
senses, to cause any perception in the mind, doth thereby produce in
the understanding a simple idea; which, whatever be the external cause
of it, when it comes to be taken notice of by our discerning faculty,
it is by the mind looked on and considered there to be a real positive
idea in the understanding, as much as any other whatsoever; though,
perhaps, the cause of it be but a privation of the subject.

2. Ideas in the mind distinguished from that in things which gives rise
to them.

Thus the ideas of heat and cold, light and darkness, white and black,
motion and rest, are equally clear and positive ideas in the mind;
though, perhaps, some of the causes which produce them are barely
privations, in those subjects from whence our senses derive those
ideas. These the understanding, in its view of them, considers all as
distinct positive ideas, without taking notice of the causes that
produce them: which is an inquiry not belonging to the idea, as it is
in the understanding, but to the nature of the things existing without
us. These are two very different things, and carefully to be
distinguished; it being one thing to perceive and know the idea of
white or black, and quite another to examine what kind of particles
they must be, and how ranged in the superficies, to make any object
appear white or black.

3. We may have the ideas when we are ignorant of their physical causes.

A painter or dyer who never inquired into their causes hath the ideas
of white and black, and other colours, as clearly, perfectly, and
distinctly in his understanding, and perhaps more distinctly, than the
philosopher who hath busied himself in considering their natures, and
thinks he knows how far either of them is, in its cause, positive or
privative; and the idea of black is no less positive in his mind than
that of white, however the cause of that colour in the external object
may be only a privation.

4. Why a privative cause in nature may occasion a positive idea.

If it were the design of my present undertaking to inquire into the
natural causes and manner of perception, I should offer this as a
reason why a privative cause might, in some cases at least, produce a
positive idea; viz. that all sensation being produced in us only by
different degrees and modes of motion in our animal spirits, variously
agitated by external objects, the abatement of any former motion must
as necessarily produce a new sensation as the variation or increase of
it; and so introduce a new idea, which depends only on a different
motion of the animal spirits in that organ.

5. Negative names need not be meaningless.

But whether this be so or not I will not here determine, but appeal to
every one’s own experience, whether the shadow of a man, though it
consists of nothing but the absence of light (and the more the absence
of light is, the more discernible is the shadow) does not, when a man
looks on it, cause as clear and positive idea in his mind, as a man
himself, though covered over with clear sunshine? And the picture of a
shadow is a positive thing. Indeed, we have negative names, to which
there be no positive ideas; but they consist wholly in negation of some
certain ideas, as SILENCE, INVISIBLE; but these signify not any ideas
in the mind but their absence.

6. Whether any ideas are due to causes really private.

And thus one may truly be said to see darkness. For, supposing a hole
perfectly dark, from whence no light is reflected, it is certain one
may see the figure of it, or it may be painted; or whether the ink I
write with makes any other idea, is a question. The privative causes I
have here assigned of positive ideas are according to the common
opinion; but, in truth, it will be hard to determine whether there be
really any ideas from a privative cause, till it be determined, whether
rest be any more a privation than motion.

7. Ideas in the Mind, Qualities in Bodies.

To discover the nature of our IDEAS the better, and to discourse of
them intelligibly, it will be convenient to distinguish them AS THEY
ARE IDEAS OR PERCEPTIONS IN OUR MINDS; and AS THEY ARE MODIFICATIONS OF
MATTER IN THE BODIES THAT CAUSE SUCH PERCEPTIONS IN US: that so we may
not think (as perhaps usually is done) that they are exactly the images
and resemblances of something inherent in the subject; most of those of
sensation being in the mind no more the likeness of something existing
without us, than the names that stand for them are the likeness of our
ideas, which yet upon hearing they are apt to excite in us.

8. Our Ideas and the Qualities of Bodies.

Whatsoever the mind perceives IN ITSELF, or is the immediate object of
perception, thought, or understanding, that I call IDEA; and the power
to produce any idea in our mind, I call QUALITY of the subject wherein
that power is. Thus a snowball having the power to produce in us the
ideas of white, cold, and round,—the power to produce those ideas in
us, as they are in the snowball, I call qualities; and as they are
sensations or perceptions in our understandings, I call them ideas;
which IDEAS, if I speak of sometimes as in the things themselves, I
would be understood to mean those qualities in the objects which
produce them in us.

9. Primary Qualities of Bodies.

Concerning these qualities, we, I think, observe these primary ones in
bodies that produce simple ideas in us, viz. SOLIDITY, EXTENSION,
MOTION or REST, NUMBER or FIGURE. These, which I call ORIGINAL or
PRIMARY qualities of body, are wholly inseparable from it; and such as
in all the alterations and changes it suffers, all the force can be
used upon it, it constantly keeps; and such as sense constantly finds
in every particle of matter which has bulk enough to be perceived; and
the mind finds inseparable from every particle of matter, though less
than to make itself singly be perceived by our senses: v.g. Take a
grain of wheat, divide it into two parts; each part has still solidity,
extension, figure, and mobility: divide it again, and it retains still
the same qualities; and so divide it on, till the parts become
insensible; they must retain still each of them all those qualities.
For division (which is all that a mill, or pestle, or any other body,
does upon another, in reducing it to insensible parts) can never take
away either solidity, extension, figure, or mobility from any body, but
only makes two or more distinct separate masses of matter, of that
which was but one before; all which distinct masses, reckoned as so
many distinct bodies, after division, make a certain number.

10. [not in early editions]

11. How Bodies produce Ideas in us.

The next thing to be considered is, how bodies operate one upon
another; and that is manifestly by impulse, and nothing else. It being
impossible to conceive that body should operate on WHAT IT DOES NOT
TOUCH (which is all one as to imagine it can operate where it is not),
or when it does touch, operate any other way than by motion.

12. By motions, external, and in our organism.

If then external objects be not united to our minds when they produce
ideas therein; and yet we perceive these ORIGINAL qualities in such of
them as singly fall under our senses, it is evident that some motion
must be thence continued by our nerves, or animal spirits, by some
parts of our bodies, to the brains or the seat of sensation, there to
produce in our minds the particular ideas we have of them. And since
the extension, figure, number, and motion of bodies of an observable
bigness, may be perceived at a distance by the sight, it is evident
some singly imperceptible bodies must come from them; to the eyes, and
thereby convey to the brain some motion; which produces these ideas
which we have of them in us.

13. How secondary Qualities produce their ideas.

After the same manner that the ideas of these original qualities are
produced in us, we may conceive that the ideas of SECONDARY qualities
are also produced, viz. by the operation of insensible particles on our
senses. For, it being manifest that there are bodies and good store of
bodies, each whereof are so small, that we cannot by any of our senses
discover either their bulk, figure, or motion,—as is evident in the
particles of the air and water, and others extremely smaller than
those; perhaps as much smaller than the particles of air and water, as
the particles of air and water are smaller than peas or
hail-stones;—let us suppose at present that, the different motions and
figures, bulk and number, of such particles, affecting the several
organs of our senses, produce in us those different sensations which we
have from the colours and smells of bodies; v.g. that a violet, by the
impulse of such insensible particles of matter, of peculiar figures and
bulks, and in different degrees and modifications of their motions,
causes the ideas of the blue colour, and sweet scent of that flower to
be produced in our minds. It being no more impossible to conceive that
God should annex such ideas to such motions, with which they have no
similitude, than that he should annex the idea of pain to the motion of
a piece of steel dividing our flesh, with which that idea hath no
resemblance.

14. They depend on the primary Qualities.

What I have said concerning colours and smells may be understood also
of tastes and sounds, and other the like sensible qualities; which,
whatever reality we by mistake attribute to them, are in truth nothing
in the objects themselves, but powers to produce various sensations in
us; and depend on those primary qualities, viz. bulk, figure, texture,
and motion of parts and therefore I call them SECONDARY QUALITIES.

15. Ideas of primary Qualities are Resemblances; of secondary, not.

From whence I think it easy to draw this observation,—that the ideas of
primary qualities of bodies are resemblances of them, and their
patterns do really exist in the bodies themselves, but the ideas
produced in us by these secondary qualities have no resemblance of them
at all. There is nothing like our ideas, existing in the bodies
themselves. They are, in the bodies we denominate from them, only a
power to produce those sensations in us: and what is sweet, blue, or
warm in idea, is but the certain bulk, figure, and motion of the
insensible parts, in the bodies themselves, which we call so.

16. Examples.

Flame is denominated hot and light; snow, white and cold; and manna,
white and sweet, from the ideas they produce in us. Which qualities are
commonly thought to be the same in those bodies that those ideas are in
us, the one the perfect resemblance of the other, as they are in a
mirror, and it would by most men be judged very extravagant if one
should say otherwise. And yet he that will consider that the same fire
that, at one distance produces in us the sensation of warmth, does, at
a nearer approach, produce in us the far different sensation of pain,
ought to bethink himself what reason he has to say—that this idea of
warmth, which was produced in him by the fire, is ACTUALLY IN THE FIRE;
and his idea of pain, which the same fire produced in him the same way,
is NOT in the fire. Why are whiteness and coldness in snow, and pain
not, when it produces the one and the other idea in us; and can do
neither, but by the bulk, figure, number, and motion of its solid
parts?

17. The ideas of the Primary alone really exist.

The particular bulk, number, figure, and motion of the parts of fire or
snow are really in them,—whether any one’s senses perceive them or no:
and therefore they may be called REAL qualities, because they really
exist in those bodies. But light, heat, whiteness, or coldness, are no
more really in them than sickness or pain is in manna. Take away the
sensation of them; let not the eyes see light or colours, nor the ear
hear sounds; let the palate not taste, nor the nose smell, and all
colours, tastes, odours, and sounds, AS THEY ARE SUCH PARTICULAR IDEAS,
vanish and cease, and are reduced to their causes, i.e. bulk, figure,
and motion of parts.

18. The secondary exist in things only as modes of the primary.

A piece of manna of a sensible bulk is able to produce in us the idea
of a round or square figure; and by being removed from one place to
another, the idea of motion. This idea of motion represents it as it
really is in manna moving: a circle or square are the same, whether in
idea or existence, in the mind or in the manna. And this, both motion
and as figure, are really in the manna, whether we take notice of
primary, them or no: this everybody is ready to agree to. Besides,
manna, by the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of its parts, has a
power to produce the sensations of sickness, and sometimes of acute
pains or gripings in us. That these ideas of sickness and pain are NOT
in the manna, but effects of its operations on us, and are nowhere when
we feel them not; this also every one readily agrees to. And yet men
are hardly to be brought to think that sweetness and whiteness are not
really in manna; which are but the effects of the operations of manna,
by the motion, size, and figure of its particles, on the eyes and
palate: as the pain and sickness caused by manna are confessedly
nothing but the effects of its operations on the stomach and guts, by
the size, motion, and figure of its insensible parts, (for by nothing
else can a body operate, as has been proved): as if it could not
operate on the eyes and palate, and thereby produce in the mind
particular distinct ideas, which in itself it has not, as well as we
allow it can operate on the guts and stomach, and thereby produce
distinct ideas, which in itself it has not. These ideas, being all
effects of the operations of manna on several parts of our bodies, by
the size, figure, number, and motion of its parts;—why those produced
by the eyes and palate should rather be thought to be really in the
manna, than those produced by the stomach and guts; or why the pain and
sickness, ideas that are the effect of manna, should be thought to be
nowhere when they are not felt; and yet the sweetness and whiteness,
effects of the same manna on other parts of the body, by ways equally
as unknown, should be thought to exist in the manna, when they are not
seen or tasted, would need some reason to explain.

19. Examples.

Let us consider the red and white colours in porphyry. Hinder light
from striking on it, and its colours vanish; it no longer produces any
such ideas in us: upon the return of light it produces these
appearances on us again. Can any one think any real alterations are
made in the porphyry by the presence or absence of light; and that
those ideas of whiteness and redness are really in porphryry in the
light, when it is plain IT HAS NO COLOUR IN THE DARK? It has, indeed,
such a configuration of particles, both night and day, as are apt, by
the rays of light rebounding from some parts of that hard stone, to
produce in us the idea of redness, and from others the idea of
whiteness; but whiteness or redness are not in it at any time, but such
a texture that hath the power to produce such a sensation in us.

20. Pound an almond, and the clear white colour will be altered into a
dirty one, and the sweet taste into an oily one. What real alteration
can the beating of the pestle make in an body, but an alteration of the
texture of it?

21. Explains how water felt as cold by one hand may be warm to the
other.

Ideas being thus distinguished and understood, we may be able to give
an account how the same water, at the same time, may produce the idea
of cold by one hand and of heat by the other: whereas it is impossible
that the same water, if those ideas were really in it, should at the
same time be both hot and cold. For, if we imagine WARMTH, as it is in
our hands, to be nothing but a certain sort and degree of motion in the
minute particles of our nerves or animal spirits, we may understand how
it is possible that the same water may, at the same time, produce the
sensations of heat in one hand and cold in the other; which yet FIGURE
never does, that never producing the idea of a square by one hand which
has produced the idea of a globe by another. But if the sensation of
heat and cold be nothing but the increase or diminution of the motion
of the minute parts of our bodies, caused by the corpuscles of any
other body, it is easy to be understood, that if that motion be greater
in one hand than in the other; if a body be applied to the two hands,
which has in its minute particles a greater motion than in those of one
of the hands, and a less than in those of the other, it will increase
the motion of the one hand and lessen it in the other; and so cause the
different sensations of heat and cold that depend thereon.

22. An excursion into natural philosophy.

I have in what just goes before been engaged in physical inquiries a
little further than perhaps I intended. But, it being necessary to make
the nature of sensation a little understood; and to make the difference
between the QUALITIES in bodies, and the IDEAS produced by them in the
mind, to be distinctly conceived, without which it were impossible to
discourse intelligibly of them;—I hope I shall be pardoned this little
excursion into natural philosophy; it being necessary in our present
inquiry to distinguish the PRIMARY and REAL qualities of bodies, which
are always in them (viz. solidity, extension, figure, number, and
motion, or rest, and are sometimes perceived by us, viz. when the
bodies they are in are big enough singly to be discerned), from those
SECONDARY and IMPUTED qualities, which are but the powers of several
combinations of those primary ones, when they operate without being
distinctly discerned;—whereby we may also come to know what ideas are,
and what are not, resemblances of something really existing in the
bodies we denominate from them.

23. Three Sorts of Qualities in Bodies.

The qualities, then, that are in bodies, rightly considered are of
three sorts:—

FIRST, The bulk, figure, number, situation, and motion or rest of their
solid parts. Those are in them, whether we perceive them or not; and
when they are of that size that we can discover them, we have by these
an idea of the thing as it is in itself; as is plain in artificial
things. These I call PRIMARY QUALITIES.

SECONDLY, The power that is in any body, by reason of its insensible
primary qualities, to operate after a peculiar manner on any of our
senses, and thereby produce in US the different ideas of several
colours, sounds, smells, tastes, &c. These are usually called SENSIBLE
QUALITIES.

THIRDLY, The power that is in any body, by reason of the particular
constitution of its primary qualities, to make such a change in the
bulk, figure, texture, and motion of ANOTHER BODY, as to make it
operate on our senses differently from what it did before. Thus the sun
has a power to make wax white, and fire to make lead fluid.

The first of these, as has been said, I think may be properly called
real, original, or primary qualities; because they are in the things
themselves, whether they are perceived or not: and upon their different
modifications it is that the secondary qualities depend.

The other two are only powers to act differently upon other things:
which powers result from the different modifications of those primary
qualities.

24. The first are Resemblances; the second thought to be Resemblances,
but are not, the third neither are nor are thought so.

But, though the two latter sorts of qualities are powers barely, and
nothing but powers, relating to several other bodies, and resulting
from the different modifications of the original qualities, yet they
are generally otherwise thought of. For the SECOND sort, viz. the
powers to produce several ideas in us, by our senses, are looked upon
as real qualities in the things thus affecting us: but the THIRD sort
are called and esteemed barely powers, v.g. The idea of heat or light,
which we receive by our eyes, or touch, from the sun, are commonly
thought real qualities existing in the sun, and something more than
mere powers in it. But when we consider the sun in reference to wax,
which it melts or blanches, we look on the whiteness and softness
produced in the wax, not as qualities in the sun, but effects produced
by powers in it. Whereas, if rightly considered, these qualities of
light and warmth, which are perceptions in me when I am warmed or
enlightened by the sun, are no otherwise in the sun, than the changes
made in the wax, when it is blanched or melted, are in the sun. They
are all of them equally POWERS IN THE SUN, DEPENDING ON ITS PRIMARY
QUALITIES; whereby it is able, in the one case, so to alter the bulk,
figure, texture, or motion of some of the insensible parts of my eyes
or hands, as thereby to produce in me the idea of light or heat; and in
the other, it is able so to alter the bulk, figure, texture, or motion
of the insensible parts of the wax, as to make them fit to produce in
me the distinct ideas of white and fluid.

25. Why the secondary are ordinarily taken for real Qualities and not
for bare Powers.

The reason why the one are ordinarily taken for real qualities, and the
other only for bare powers, seems to be because the ideas we have of
distinct colours, sounds, &c. containing nothing at all in them of
bulk, figure, or motion we are not apt to think them the effects of
these primary qualities; which appear not, to our senses, to operate in
their production, and with which they have not any apparent congruity
or conceivable connexion. Hence it is that we are so forward as to
imagine, that those ideas are the resemblances of something really
existing in the objects themselves since sensation discovers nothing of
bulk, figure, or motion of parts in their production; nor can reason
show how bodies BY THEIR BULK, FIGURE, AND MOTION, should produce in
the mind the ideas of blue or yellow, &c. But, in the other case in the
operations of bodies changing the qualities one of another, we plainly
discover that the quality produced hath commonly no resemblance with
anything in the thing producing it; wherefore we look on it as a bare
effect of power. For, through receiving the idea of heat or light from
the sun, we are apt to think IT is a perception and resemblance of such
a quality in the sun; yet when we see wax, or a fair face, receive
change of colour from the sun, we cannot imagine THAT to be the
reception or resemblance of anything in the sun, because we find not
those different colours in the sun itself. For, our senses being able
to observe a likeness or unlikeness of sensible qualities in two
different external objects, we forwardly enough conclude the production
of any sensible quality in any subject to be an effect of bare power,
and not the communication of any quality which was really in the
efficient, when we find no such sensible quality in the thing that
produced it. But our senses, not being able to discover any unlikeness
between the idea produced in us, and the quality of the object
producing it, we are apt to imagine that our ideas are resemblances of
something in the objects, and not the effects of certain powers placed
in the modification of their primary qualities, with which primary
qualities the ideas produced in us have no resemblance.

26. Secondary Qualities twofold; first, immediately perceivable;
secondly, mediately perceivable.

To conclude. Beside those before-mentioned primary qualities in bodies,
viz. bulk, figure, extension, number, and motion of their solid parts;
all the rest, whereby we take notice of bodies, and distinguish them
one from another, are nothing else but several powers in them,
depending on those primary qualities; whereby they are fitted, either
by immediately operating on our bodies to produce several different
ideas in us; or else, by operating on other bodies, so to change their
primary qualities as to render them capable of producing ideas in us
different from what before they did. The former of these, I think, may
be called secondary qualities IMMEDIATELY PERCEIVABLE: the latter,
secondary qualities, MEDIATELY PERCEIVABLE.




CHAPTER IX.
OF PERCEPTION.


1. Perception the first simple Idea of Reflection.

PERCEPTION, as it is the first faculty of the mind exercised about our
ideas; so it is the first and simplest idea we have from reflection,
and is by some called thinking in general. Though thinking, in the
propriety of the English tongue, signifies that sort of operation in
the mind about its ideas, wherein the mind is active; where it, with
some degree of voluntary attention, considers anything. For in bare
naked perception, the mind is, for the most part, only passive; and
what it perceives, it cannot avoid perceiving.

2. Reflection alone can give us the idea of what perception is.

What perception is, every one will know better by reflecting on what he
does himself, when he sees, hears, feels, &c., or thinks, than by any
discourse of mine. Whoever reflects on what passes in his own mind
cannot miss it. And if he does not reflect, all the words in the world
cannot make him have any notion of it.

3. Arises in sensation only when the mind notices the organic
impression.

This is certain, that whatever alterations are made in the body, if
they reach not the mind; whatever impressions are made on the outward
parts, if they are not taken notice of within, there is no perception.
Fire may burn our bodies with no other effect than it does a billet,
unless the motion be continued to the brain, and there the sense of
heat, or idea of pain, be produced in the mind; wherein consists actual
perception.

4. Impulse on the organ insufficient.

How often may a man observe in himself, that whilst his mind is
intently employed in the contemplation of some objects, and curiously
surveying some ideas that are there, it takes no notice of impressions
of sounding bodies made upon the organ of hearing, with the same
alteration that uses to be for the producing the idea of sound? A
sufficient impulse there may be on the organ; but it not reaching the
observation of the mind, there follows no perception: and though the
motion that uses to produce the idea of sound be made in the ear, yet
no sound is heard. Want of sensation, in this case, is not through any
defect in the organ, or that the man’s ears are less affected than at
other times when he does hear but that which uses to produce the idea,
though conveyed in by the usual organ, not being taken notice of in the
understanding, and so imprinting no idea in the mind, there follows no
sensation. So that wherever there is sense of perception, there some
idea is actually produced, and present in the understanding.

5. Children, though they may have Ideas in the Womb, have none innate.

Therefore I doubt not but children, by the exercise of their senses
about objects that affect them in the womb receive some few ideas
before they are born, as the unavoidable effects, either of the bodies
that environ them, or else of those wants or diseases they suffer;
amongst which (if one may conjecture concerning things not very capable
of examination) I think the ideas of hunger and warmth are two: which
probably are some of the first that children have, and which they
scarce ever part with again.

6. The effects of Sensation in the womb.

But though it be reasonable to imagine that children receive some ideas
before they come into the world, yet these simple ideas are far from
those INNATE PRINCIPLES which some contend for, and we, above, have
rejected. These here mentioned, being the effects of sensation, are
only from some affections of the body, which happen to them there, and
so depend on something exterior to the mind; no otherwise differing in
their manner of production from other ideas derived from sense, but
only in the precedency of time. Whereas those innate principles are
supposed to be quite of another nature; not coming into the mind by any
accidental alterations in, or operations on the body; but, as it were,
original characters impressed upon it, in the very first moment of its
being and constitution.

7. Which Ideas appear first is not evident, nor important.

As there are some ideas which we may reasonably suppose may be
introduced into the minds of children in the womb, subservient to the
necessities of their life and being there: so, after they are born,
those ideas are the earliest imprinted which happen to be the sensible
qualities which first occur to them; amongst which light is not the
least considerable, nor of the weakest efficacy. And how covetous the
mind is to be furnished with all such ideas as have no pain
accompanying them, may be a little guessed by what is observable in
children new-born; who always turn their eyes to that part from whence
the light comes, lay them how you please. But the ideas that are most
familiar at first, being various according to the divers circumstances
of children’s first entertainment in the world, the order wherein the
several ideas come at first into the mind is very various, and
uncertain also; neither is it much material to know it.

8. Sensations often changed by the Judgment.

We are further to consider concerning perception, that the ideas we
receive by sensation are often, in grown people, altered by the
judgment, without our taking notice of it. When we set before our eyes
a round globe of any uniform colour, v.g. gold, alabaster, or jet, it
is certain that the idea thereby imprinted on our mind is of a flat
circle, variously shadowed, with several degrees of light and
brightness coming to our eyes. But we having, by use, been accustomed
to perceive what kind of appearance convex bodies are wont to make in
us; what alterations are made in the reflections of light by the
difference of the sensible figures of bodies;—the judgment presently,
by an habitual custom, alters the appearances into their causes. So
that from that which is truly variety of shadow or colour, collecting
the figure, it makes it pass for a mark of figure, and frames to itself
the perception of a convex figure and an uniform colour; when the idea
we receive from thence is only a plane variously coloured, as is
evident in painting. To which purpose I shall here insert a problem of
that very ingenious and studious promoter of real knowledge, the
learned and worthy Mr. Molineux, which he was pleased to send me in a
letter some months since; and it is this:—“Suppose a man BORN blind,
and now adult, and taught by his TOUCH to distinguish between a cube
and a sphere of the same metal, and nighly of the same bigness, so as
to tell, when he felt one and the other, which is the cube, which the
sphere. Suppose then the cube and sphere placed on a table, and the
blind man be made to see: quaere, whether BY HIS SIGHT, BEFORE HE
TOUCHED THEM, he could now distinguish and tell which is the globe,
which the cube?” To which the acute and judicious proposer answers,
“Not. For, though he has obtained the experience of how a globe, how a
cube affects his touch, yet he has not yet obtained the experience,
that what affects his touch so or so, must affect his sight so or so;
or that a protuberant angle in the cube, that pressed his hand
unequally, shall appear to his eye as it does in the cube.”—I agree
with this thinking gentleman, whom I am proud to call my friend, in his
answer to this problem; and am of opinion that the blind man, at first
sight, would not be able with certainty to say which was the globe,
which the cube, whilst he only saw them; though he could unerringly
name them by his touch, and certainly distinguish them by the
difference of their figures felt. This I have set down, and leave with
my reader, as an occasion for him to consider how much he may be
beholden to experience, improvement, and acquired notions, where he
thinks he had not the least use of, or help from them. And the rather,
because this observing gentleman further adds, that “having, upon the
occasion of my book, proposed this to divers very ingenious men, he
hardly ever met with one that at first gave the answer to it which he
thinks true, till by hearing his reasons they were convinced.”

9. This judgement apt to be mistaken for direct perception.

But this is not, I think, usual in any of our ideas, but those received
by sight. Because sight, the most comprehensive of all our senses,
conveying to our minds the ideas of light and colours, which are
peculiar only to that sense; and also the far different ideas of space,
figure, and motion, the several varieties whereof change the
appearances of its proper object, viz. light and colours; we bring
ourselves by use to judge of the one by the other. This, in many cases
by a settled habit,—in things whereof we have frequent experience is
performed so constantly and so quick, that we take that for the
perception of our sensation which is an idea formed by our judgment; so
that one, viz. that of sensation, serves only to excite the other, and
is scarce taken notice of itself;—as a man who reads or hears with
attention and understanding, takes little notice of the characters or
sounds, but of the ideas that are excited in him by them.

10. How, by Habit, ideas of Sensation are unconsciously changed into
ideas of Judgment.

Nor need we wonder that this is done with so little notice, if we
consider how quick the actions of the mind are performed. For, as
itself is thought to take up no space to have no extension; so its
actions seem to require no time but many of them seem to be crowded
into an instant. I speak this in comparison to the actions of the body.
Any one may easily observe this in his own thoughts, who will take the
pains to reflect on them. How, as it were in an instant, do our minds,
with one glance, see all the parts of a demonstration, which may very
well be called a long one, if we consider the time it will require to
put it into words, and step by step show it another? Secondly, we shall
not be so much surprised that this is done in us with so little notice,
if we consider how the facility which we get of doing things, by a
custom of doing, makes them often pass in us without our notice.
Habits, especially such as are begun very early, come at last to
produce actions in us, which often escape our observation. How
frequently do we, in a day, cover our eyes with our eyelids, without
perceiving that we are at all in the dark! Men that, by custom, have
got the use of a by-word, do almost in every sentence pronounce sounds
which, though taken notice of by others, they themselves neither hear
nor observe. And therefore it is not so strange, that our mind should
often change the idea of its sensation into that of its judgment, and
make one serve only to excite the other, without our taking notice of
it.

11. Perception puts the difference between Animals and Vegetables.

This faculty of perception seems to me to be, that which puts the
distinction betwixt the animal kingdom and the inferior parts of
nature. For, however vegetables have, many of them, some degrees of
motion, and upon the different application of other bodies to them, do
very briskly alter their figures and motions, and so have obtained the
name of sensitive plants, from a motion which has some resemblance to
that which in animals follows upon sensation: yet I suppose it is all
bare MECHANISM; and no otherwise produced than the turning of a wild
oat-beard, by the insinuation of the particles of moisture, or the
shortening of a rope, by the affusion of water. All which is done
without any sensation in the subject, or the having or receiving any
ideas.

12. Perception in all animals.

Perception, I believe, is, in some degree, in all sorts of animals;
though in some possibly the avenues provided by nature for the
reception of sensations are so few, and the perception they are
received with so obscure and dull, that it comes extremely short of the
quickness and variety of sensation which is in other animals; but yet
it is sufficient for, and wisely adapted to, the state and condition of
that sort of animals who are thus made. So that the wisdom and goodness
of the Maker plainly appear in all the parts of this stupendous fabric,
and all the several degrees and ranks of creatures in it.

13. According to their condition.

We may, I think, from the make of an oyster or cockle, reasonably
conclude that it has not so many, nor so quick senses as a man, or
several other animals; nor if it had, would it, in that state and
incapacity of transferring itself from one place to another, be
bettered by them. What good would sight and hearing do to a creature
that cannot move itself to or from the objects wherein at a distance it
perceives good or evil? And would not quickness of sensation be an
inconvenience to an animal that must lie still where chance has once
placed it, and there receive the afflux of colder or warmer, clean or
foul water, as it happens to come to it?

14. Decay of perception in old age.

But yet I cannot but think there is some small dull perception, whereby
they are distinguished from perfect insensibility. And that this may be
so, we have plain instances, even in mankind itself. Take one in whom
decrepit old age has blotted out the memory of his past knowledge, and
clearly wiped out the ideas his mind was formerly stored with, and has,
by destroying his sight, hearing, and smell quite, and his taste to a
great degree, stopped up almost all the passages for new ones to enter;
or if there be some of the inlets yet half open, the impressions made
are scarcely perceived, or not at all retained. How far such an one
(notwithstanding all that is boasted of innate principles) is in his
knowledge and intellectual faculties above the condition of a cockle or
an oyster, I leave to be considered. And if a man had passed sixty
years in such a state, as it is possible he might, as well as three
days, I wonder what difference there would be, in any intellectual
perfections, between him and the lowest degree of animals.

15. Perception the Inlet of all materials of Knowledge.

Perception then being the FIRST step and degree towards knowledge, and
the inlet of all the materials of it; the fewer senses any man, as well
as any other creature, hath; and the fewer and duller the impressions
are that are made by them; and the duller the faculties are that are
employed about them,—the more remote are they from that knowledge which
is to be found in some men. But this being in great variety of degrees
(as may be perceived amongst men) cannot certainly be discovered in the
several species of animals, much less in their particular individuals.
It suffices me only to have remarked here,—that perception is the first
operation of all our intellectual faculties, and the inlet of all
knowledge in our minds. And I am apt too to imagine, that it is
perception, in the lowest degree of it, which puts the boundaries
between animals and the inferior ranks of creatures. But this I mention
only as my conjecture by the by; it being indifferent to the matter in
hand which way the learned shall determine of it.




CHAPTER X.
OF RETENTION.


1. Contemplation

The next faculty of the mind, whereby it makes a further progress
towards knowledge, is that which I call RETENTION; or the keeping of
those simple ideas which from sensation or reflection it hath received.
This is done two ways.

First, by keeping the idea which is brought into it, for some time
actually in view, which is called CONTEMPLATION.

2. Memory.

The other way of retention is, the power to revive again in our minds
those ideas which, after imprinting, have disappeared, or have been as
it were laid aside out of sight. And thus we do, when we conceive heat
or light, yellow or sweet,—the object being removed. This is MEMORY,
which is as it were the storehouse of our ideas. For, the narrow mind
of man not being capable of having many ideas under view and
consideration at once, it was necessary to have a repository, to lay up
those ideas which, at another time, it might have use of. But, our
IDEAS being nothing but actual perceptions in the mind, which cease to
be anything; when there is no perception of them; this laying up of our
ideas in the repository of the memory signifies no more but this,—that
the mind has a power in many cases to revive perceptions which it has
once had, with this additional perception annexed to them, that IT HAS
HAD THEM BEFORE. And in this sense it is that our ideas are said to be
in our memories, when indeed they are actually nowhere;—but only there
is an ability in the mind when it will to revive them again, and as it
were paint them anew on itself, though some with more, some with less
difficulty; some more lively, and others more obscurely. And thus it
is, by the assistance of this faculty, that we are said to have all
those ideas in our understandings which, though we do not actually
contemplate yet we CAN bring in sight, and make appear again, and be
the objects of our thoughts, without the help of those sensible
qualities which first imprinted them there.

3. Attention, Repetition, Pleasure and Pain, fix Ideas.

Attention and repetition help much to the fixing any ideas in the
memory. But those which naturally at first make the deepest and most
lasting impressions, are those which are accompanied with pleasure or
pain. The great business of the senses being, to make us take notice of
what hurts or advantages the body, it is wisely ordered by nature, as
has been shown, that pain should accompany the reception of several
ideas; which, supplying the place of consideration and reasoning in
children, and acting quicker than consideration in grown men, makes
both the old and young avoid painful objects with that haste which is
necessary for their preservation; and in both settles in the memory a
caution for the future.

4. Ideas fade in the Memory.

Concerning the several degrees of lasting, wherewith ideas are
imprinted on the memory, we may observe,—that some of them have been
produced in the understanding by an object affecting the senses once
only, and no more than once; others, that have more than once offered
themselves to the senses, have yet been little taken notice of: the
mind, either heedless, as in children, or otherwise employed, as in men
intent only on one thing; not setting the stamp deep into itself. And
in some, where they are set on with care and repeated impressions,
either through the temper of the body, or some other fault, the memory
is very weak. In all these cases, ideas in the mind quickly fade, and
often vanish quite out of the understanding, leaving no more footsteps
or remaining characters of themselves than shadows do flying over
fields of corn, and the mind is as void of them as if they had never
been there.

5. Causes of oblivion.

Thus many of those ideas which were produced in the minds of children,
in the beginning of their sensation, (some of which perhaps, as of some
pleasures and pains, were before they were born, and others in their
infancy,) if in the future course of their lives they are not repeated
again, are quite lost, without the least glimpse remaining of them.
This may be observed in those who by some mischance have lost their
sight when they were very young; in whom the ideas of colours having
been but slightly taken notice of, and ceasing to be repeated, do quite
wear out; so that some years after, there is no more notion nor memory
of colours left in their minds, than in those of people born blind. The
memory of some men, it is true, is very tenacious, even to a miracle.
But yet there seems to be a constant decay of all our ideas, even of
those which are struck deepest, and in minds the most retentive; so
that if they be not sometimes renewed, by repeated exercise of the
senses, or reflection on those kinds of objects which at first
occasioned them, the print wears out, and at last there remains nothing
to be seen. Thus the ideas, as well as children, of our youth, often
die before us: and our minds represent to us those tombs to which we
are approaching; where, though the brass and marble remain, yet the
inscriptions are effaced by time, and the imagery moulders away. The
pictures drawn in our minds are laid in fading colours; and if not
sometimes refreshed, vanish and disappear. How much the constitution of
our bodies are concerned in this; and whether the temper of the brain
makes this difference, that in some it retains the characters drawn on
it like marble, in others like freestone, and in others little better
than sand, I shall here inquire; though it may seem probable that the
constitution of the body does sometimes influence the memory, since we
oftentimes find a disease quite strip the mind of all its ideas, and
the flames of a fever in a few days calcine all those images to dust
and confusion, which seemed to be as lasting as if graved in marble.

6. Constantly repeated Ideas can scarce be lost.

But concerning the ideas themselves, it is easy to remark, that those
that are oftenest refreshed (amongst which are those that are conveyed
into the mind by more ways than one) by a frequent return of the
objects or actions that produce them, fix themselves best in the
memory, and remain clearest and longest there; and therefore those
which are of the original qualities of bodies, viz. solidity,
extension, figure, motion, and rest; and those that almost constantly
affect our bodies, as heat and cold; and those which are the affections
of all kinds of beings, as existence, duration, and number, which
almost every object that affects our senses, every thought which
employs our minds, bring along with them;—these, I say, and the like
ideas, are seldom quite lost, whilst the mind retains any ideas at all.

7. In Remembering, the Mind is often active.

In this secondary perception, as I may so call it, or viewing again the
ideas that are lodged in the memory, the mind is oftentimes more than
barely passive; the appearance of those dormant pictures depending
sometimes on the WILL. The mind very often sets itself on work in
search of some hidden idea, and turns as it were the eye of the soul
upon it; though sometimes too they start up in our minds of their own
accord, and offer themselves to the understanding; and very often are
roused and tumbled out of their dark cells into open daylight, by
turbulent and tempestuous passions; our affections bringing ideas to
our memory, which had otherwise lain quiet and unregarded. This further
is to be observed, concerning ideas lodged in the memory, and upon
occasion revived by the mind, that they are not only (as the word
REVIVE imports) none of them new ones, but also that the mind takes
notice of them as of a former impression, and renews its acquaintance
with them, as with ideas it had known before. So that though ideas
formerly imprinted are not all constantly in view, yet in remembrance
they are constantly known to be such as have been formerly imprinted;
i.e. in view, and taken notice of before, by the understanding.

8. Two defects in the Memory, Oblivion and Slowness.

Memory, in an intellectual creature, is necessary in the next degree to
perception. It is of so great moment, that, where it is wanting, all
the rest of our faculties are in a great measure useless. And we in our
thoughts, reasonings, and knowledge, could not proceed beyond present
objects, were it not for the assistance of our memories; wherein there
may be two defects:—

First, That it loses the idea quite, and so far it produces perfect
ignorance. For, since we can know nothing further than we have the idea
of it, when that is gone, we are in perfect ignorance.

Secondly, That it moves slowly, and retrieves not the ideas that it
has, and are laid up in store, quick enough to serve the mind upon
occasion. This, if it be to a great degree, is stupidity; and he who,
through this default in his memory, has not the ideas that are really
preserved there, ready at hand when need and occasion calls for them,
were almost as good be without them quite, since they serve him to
little purpose. The dull man, who loses the opportunity, whilst he is
seeking in his mind for those ideas that should serve his turn, is not
much more happy in his knowledge than one that is perfectly ignorant.
It is the business therefore of the memory to furnish to the mind those
dormant ideas which it has present occasion for; in the having them
ready at hand on all occasions, consists that which we call invention,
fancy, and quickness of parts.

9. A defect which belongs to the memory of Man, as finite.

These are defects we may observe in the memory of one man compared with
another. There is another defect which we may conceive to be in the
memory of man in general;—compared with some superior created
intellectual beings, which in this faculty may so far excel man, that
they may have CONSTANTLY in view the whole scene of all their former
actions, wherein no one of the thoughts they have ever had may slip out
of their sight. The omniscience of God, who knows all things, past,
present, and to come, and to whom the thoughts of men’s hearts always
lie open, may satisfy us of the possibility of this. For who can doubt
but God may communicate to those glorious spirits, his immediate
attendants, any of his perfections; in what proportions he pleases, as
far as created finite beings can be capable? It is reported of that
prodigy of parts, Monsieur Pascal, that till the decay of his health
had impaired his memory, he forgot nothing of what he had done, read,
or thought, in any part of his rational age. This is a privilege so
little known to most men, that it seems almost incredible to those who,
after the ordinary way, measure all others by themselves; but yet, when
considered, may help us to enlarge our thoughts towards greater
perfections of it, in superior ranks of spirits. For this of Monsieur
Pascal was still with the narrowness that human minds are confined to
here,—of having great variety of ideas only by succession, not all at
once. Whereas the several degrees of angels may probably have larger
views; and some of them be endowed with capacities able to retain
together, and constantly set before them, as in one picture, all their
past knowledge at once. This, we may conceive, would be no small
advantage to the knowledge of a thinking man,—if all his past thoughts
and reasonings could be ALWAYS present to him. And therefore we may
suppose it one of those ways, wherein the knowledge of separate spirits
may exceedingly surpass ours.

10. Brutes have Memory.

This faculty of laying up and retaining the ideas that are brought into
the mind, several other animals seem to have to a great degree, as well
as man. For, to pass by other instances, birds learning of tunes, and
the endeavours one may observe in them to hit the notes right, put it
past doubt with me, that they have perception, and retain ideas in
their memories, and use them for patterns. For it seems to me
impossible that they should endeavour to conform their voices to notes
(as it is plain they do) of which they had no ideas. For, though I
should grant sound may mechanically cause a certain motion of the
animal spirits in the brains of those birds, whilst the tune is
actually playing; and that motion may be continued on to the muscles of
the wings, and so the bird mechanically be driven away by certain
noises, because this may tend to the bird’s preservation; yet that can
never be supposed a reason why it should cause mechanically—either
whilst the tune is playing, much less after it has ceased—such a motion
of the organs in the bird’s voice as should conform it to the notes of
a foreign sound, which imitation can be of no use to the bird’s
preservation. But, which is more, it cannot with any appearance of
reason be supposed (much less proved) that birds, without sense and
memory, can approach their notes nearer and nearer by degrees to a tune
played yesterday; which if they have no idea of in their memory, is now
nowhere, nor can be a pattern for them to imitate, or which any
repeated essays can bring them nearer to. Since there is no reason why
the sound of a pipe should leave traces in their brains, which, not at
first, but by their after-endeavours, should produce the like sounds;
and why the sounds they make themselves, should not make traces which
they should follow, as well as those of the pipe, is impossible to
conceive.




CHAPTER XI.
OF DISCERNING, AND OTHER OPERATIONS OF THE MIND.


1. No Knowledge without Discernment.

Another faculty we may take notice of in our minds is that of
DISCERNING and DISTINGUISHING between the several ideas it has. It is
not enough to have a confused perception of something in general.
Unless the mind had a distinct perception of different objects and
their qualities, it would be capable of very little knowledge, though
the bodies that affect us were as busy about us as they are now, and
the mind were continually employed in thinking. On this faculty of
distinguishing one thing from another depends the evidence and
certainty of several, even very general, propositions, which have
passed for innate truths;—because men, overlooking the true cause why
those propositions find universal assent, impute it wholly to native
uniform impressions; whereas it in truth depends upon this clear
discerning faculty of the mind, whereby it PERCEIVES two ideas to be
the same, or different. But of this more hereafter.

2. The Difference of Wit and Judgment.

How much the imperfection of accurately discriminating ideas one from
another lies, either in the dulness or faults of the organs of sense;
or want of acuteness, exercise, or attention in the understanding; or
hastiness and precipitancy, natural to some tempers, I will not here
examine: it suffices to take notice, that this is one of the operations
that the mind may reflect on and observe in itself. It is of that
consequence to its other knowledge, that so far as this faculty is in
itself dull, or not rightly made use of, for the distinguishing one
thing from another,—so far our notions are confused, and our reason and
judgment disturbed or misled. If in having our ideas in the memory
ready at hand consists quickness of parts; in this, of having them
unconfused, and being able nicely to distinguish one thing from
another, where there is but the least difference, consists, in a great
measure, the exactness of judgment, and clearness of reason, which is
to be observed in one man above another. And hence perhaps may be given
some reason of that common observation,—that men who have a great deal
of wit, and prompt memories, have not always the clearest judgment or
deepest reason. For WIT lying most in the assemblage of ideas, and
putting those together with quickness and variety, wherein can be found
any resemblance or congruity, thereby to make up pleasant pictures and
agreeable visions in the fancy; JUDGMENT, on the contrary, lies quite
on the other side, in separating carefully, one from another, ideas
wherein can be found the least difference, thereby to avoid being
misled by similitude, and by affinity to take one thing for another.
This is a way of proceeding quite contrary to metaphor and allusion;
wherein for the most part lies that entertainment and pleasantry of
wit, which strikes so lively on the fancy, and therefore is so
acceptable to all people, because its beauty appears at first sight,
and there is required no labour of thought to examine what truth or
reason there is in it. The mind, without looking any further, rests
satisfied with the agreeableness of the picture and the gaiety of the
fancy. And it is a kind of affront to go about to examine it, by the
severe rules of truth and good reason; whereby it appears that it
consists in something that is not perfectly conformable to them.

3. Clearness alone hinders Confusion.

To the well distinguishing our ideas, it chiefly contributes that they
be CLEAR and DETERMINATE. And when they are so, it will not breed any
confusion or mistake about them, though the senses should (as sometimes
they do) convey them from the same object differently on different
occasions, and so seem to err. For, though a man in a fever should from
sugar have a bitter taste, which at another time would produce a sweet
one, yet the idea of bitter in that man’s mind would be as clear and
distinct from the idea of sweet as if he had tasted only gall. Nor does
it make any more confusion between the two ideas of sweet and bitter
that the same sort of body produces at one time one, and at another
time another idea by the taste, than it makes a confusion in two ideas
of white and sweet, or white and round, that the same piece of sugar
produces them both in the mind at the same time. And the ideas of
orange-colour and azure, that are produced in the mind by the same
parcel of the infusion of lignum nephritium, are no less distinct ideas
than those of the same colours taken from two very different bodies.

4. Comparing.

The COMPARING them one with another, in respect of extent, degrees,
time, place, or any other circumstances, is another operation of the
mind about its ideas, and is that upon which depends all that large
tribe of ideas comprehended under RELATION; which, of how vast an
extent it is, I shall have occasion to consider hereafter.

5. Brutes compare but imperfectly.

How far brutes partake in this faculty, is not easy to determine. I
imagine they have it not in any great degree, for, though they probably
have several ideas distinct enough, yet it seems to me to be the
prerogative of human understanding, when it has sufficiently
distinguished any ideas, so as to perceive them to be perfectly
different, and so consequently two, to cast about and consider in what
circumstances they are capable to be compared. And therefore, I think,
beasts compare not their ideas further than some sensible circumstances
annexed to the objects themselves. The other power of comparing, which
may be observed in men, belonging to general ideas, and useful only to
abstract reasonings, we may probably conjecture beasts have not.

6. Compounding.

The next operation we may observe in the mind about its ideas is
COMPOSITION; whereby it puts together several of those simple ones it
has received from sensation and reflection, and combines them into
complex ones. Under this of composition may be reckoned also that of
ENLARGING, wherein, though the composition does not so much appear as
in more complex ones, yet it is nevertheless a putting several ideas
together, though of the same kind. Thus, by adding several units
together, we make the idea of a dozen; and putting together the
repeated ideas of several perches, we frame that of a furlong.

7. Brutes compound but little.

In this also, I suppose, brutes come far short of man. For, though they
take in, and retain together, several combinations of simple ideas, as
possibly the shape, smell, and voice of his master make up the complex
idea a dog has of him, or rather are so many distinct marks whereby he
knows him; yet I do not think they do of themselves ever compound them,
and make complex ideas. And perhaps even where we think they have
complex ideas, it is only one simple one that directs them in the
knowledge of several things, which possibly they distinguish less by
their sight than we imagine. For I have been credibly informed that a
bitch will nurse, play with, and be fond of young foxes, as much as,
and in place of her puppies, if you can but get them once to suck her
so long that her milk may go through them. And those animals which have
a numerous brood of young ones at once, appear not to have any
knowledge of their number; for though they are mightily concerned for
any of their young that are taken from them whilst they are in sight or
hearing, yet if one or two of them be stolen from them in their
absence, or without noise, they appear not to miss them, or to have any
sense that their number is lessened.

8. Naming.

When children have, by repeated sensations, got ideas fixed in their
memories, they begin by degrees to learn the use of signs. And when
they have got the skill to apply the organs of speech to the framing of
articulate sounds, they begin to make use of words, to signify their
ideas to others. These verbal signs they sometimes borrow from others,
and sometimes make themselves, as one may observe among the new and
unusual names children often give to things in the first use of
language.

9. Abstraction.

The use of words then being to stand as outward mark of our internal
ideas, and those ideas being taken from particular things, if every
particular idea that we take up should have a distinct name, names must
be endless. To prevent this, the mind makes the particular ideas
received from particular objects to become general; which is done by
considering them as they are in the mind such appearances,—separate
from all other existences, and the circumstances of real existence, as
time, place, or any other concomitant ideas. This is called
ABSTRACTION, whereby ideas taken from particular beings become general
representatives of all of the same kind; and their names general names,
applicable to whatever exists conformable to such abstract ideas. Such
precise, naked appearances in the mind, without considering how,
whence, or with what others they came there, the understanding lays up
(with names commonly annexed to them) as the standards to rank real
existences into sorts, as they agree with these patterns, and to
denominate them accordingly. Thus the same colour being observed to-day
in chalk or snow, which the mind yesterday received from milk, it
considers that appearance alone, makes it a representative of all of
that kind; and having given it the name WHITENESS, it by that sound
signifies the same quality wheresoever to be imagined or met with; and
thus universals, whether ideas or terms, are made.

10. Brutes abstract not.

If it may be doubted whether beasts compound and enlarge their ideas
that way to any degree; this, I think, I may be positive in,—that the
power of abstracting is not at all in them; and that the having of
general ideas is that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and
brutes, and is an excellency which the faculties of brutes do by no
means attain to. For it is evident we observe no footsteps in them of
making use of general signs for universal ideas; from which we have
reason to imagine that they have not the faculty of abstracting, or
making general ideas, since they have no use of words, or any other
general signs.

11. Brutes abstract not, yet are not bare machines.

Nor can it be imputed to their want of fit organs to frame articulate
sounds, that they have no use or knowledge of general words; since many
of them, we find, can fashion such sounds, and pronounce words
distinctly enough, but never with any such application. And, on the
other side, men who, through some defect in the organs, want words, yet
fail not to express their universal ideas by signs, which serve them
instead of general words, a faculty which we see beasts come short in.
And, therefore, I think, we may suppose, that it is in this that the
species of brutes are discriminated from man: and it is that proper
difference wherein they are wholly separated, and which at last widens
to so vast a distance. For if they have any ideas at all, and are not
bare machines, (as some would have them,) we cannot deny them to have
some reason. It seems as evident to me, that they do reason, as that
they have sense; but it is only in particular ideas, just as they
received them from their senses. They are the best of them tied up
within those narrow bounds, and have not (as I think) the faculty to
enlarge them by any kind of abstraction.

12. Idiots and Madmen.

How far idiots are concerned in the want or weakness of any, or all of
the foregoing faculties, an exact observation of their several ways of
faultering would no doubt discover. For those who either perceive but
dully, or retain the ideas that come into their minds but ill, who
cannot readily excite or compound them, will have little matter to
think on. Those who cannot distinguish, compare, and abstract, would
hardly be able to understand and make use of language, or judge or
reason to any tolerable degree; but only a little and imperfectly about
things present, and very familiar to their senses. And indeed any of
the forementioned faculties, if wanting, or out of order, produce
suitable defects in men’s understandings and knowledge.

13. Difference between Idiots and Madmen.

In fine, the defect in naturals seems to proceed from want of
quickness, activity, and motion in the intellectual faculties, whereby
they are deprived of reason; whereas madmen, on the other side, seem to
suffer by the other extreme. For they do not appear to me to have lost
the faculty of reasoning, but having joined together some ideas very
wrongly, they mistake them for truths; and they err as men do that
argue right from wrong principles. For, by the violence of their
imaginations, having taken their fancies for realities, they make right
deductions from them. Thus you shall find a distracted man fancying
himself a king, with a right inference require suitable attendance,
respect, and obedience: others who have thought themselves made of
glass, have used the caution necessary to preserve such brittle bodies.
Hence it comes to pass that a man who is very sober, and of a right
understanding in all other things, may in one particular be as frantic
as any in Bedlam; if either by any sudden very strong impression, or
long fixing his fancy upon one sort of thoughts, incoherent ideas have
been cemented together so powerfully, as to remain united. But there
are degrees of madness, as of folly; the disorderly jumbling ideas
together is in some more, and some less. In short, herein seems to lie
the difference between idiots and madmen: that madmen put wrong ideas
together, and so make wrong propositions, but argue and reason right
from them; but idiots make very few or no propositions, and reason
scarce at all.

14. Method followed in this explication of Faculties.

These, I think, are the first faculties and operations of the mind,
which it makes use of in understanding; and though they are exercised
about all its ideas in general, yet the instances I have hitherto given
have been chiefly in simple ideas. And I have subjoined the explication
of these faculties of the mind to that of simple ideas, before I come
to what I have to say concerning complex ones, for these following
reasons:—

First, Because several of these faculties being exercised at first
principally about simple ideas, we might, by following nature in its
ordinary method, trace and discover them, in their rise, progress, and
gradual improvements.

Secondly, Because observing the faculties of the mind, how they operate
about simple ideas,—which are usually, in most men’s minds, much more
clear, precise, and distinct than complex ones,—we may the better
examine and learn how the mind extracts, denominates, compares, and
exercises, in its other operations about those which are complex,
wherein we are much more liable to mistake. Thirdly, Because these very
operations of the mind about ideas received from sensations, are
themselves, when reflected on, another set of ideas, derived from that
other source of our knowledge, which I call reflection; and therefore
fit to be considered in this place after the simple ideas of sensation.
Of compounding, comparing, abstracting, &c., I have but just spoken,
having occasion to treat of them more at large in other places.

15. The true Beginning of Human Knowledge.

And thus I have given a short, and, I think, true HISTORY OF THE FIRST
BEGINNINGS OF HUMAN KNOWLEDGE;—whence the mind has its first objects;
and by what steps it makes its progress to the laying in and storing up
those ideas, out of which is to be framed all the knowledge it is
capable of: wherein I must appeal to experience and observation whether
I am in the right: the best way to come to truth being to examine
things as really they are, and not to conclude they are, as we fancy of
ourselves, or have been taught by others to imagine.

16. Appeal to Experience.

To deal truly, this is the only way that I can discover, whereby the
IDEAS OF THINGS are brought into the understanding. If other men have
either innate ideas or infused principles, they have reason to enjoy
them; and if they are sure of it, it is impossible for others to deny
them the privilege that they have above their neighbours. I can speak
but of what I find in myself, and is agreeable to those notions, which,
if we will examine the whole course of men in their several ages,
countries, and educations, seem to depend on those foundations which I
have laid, and to correspond with this method in all the parts and
degrees thereof.

17. Dark Room.

I pretend not to teach, but to inquire; and therefore cannot but
confess here again,—that external and internal sensation are the only
passages I can find of knowledge to the understanding. These alone, as
far as I can discover, are the windows by which light is let into this
DARK ROOM. For, methinks, the understanding is not much unlike a closet
wholly shut from light, with only some little openings left, to let in
external visible resemblances, or ideas of things without: which, would
they but stay there, and lie so orderly as to be found upon occasion,
it would very much resemble the understanding of a man, in reference to
all objects of sight, and the ideas of them.

These are my guesses concerning the means whereby the understanding
comes to have and retain simple ideas, and the modes of them, with some
other operations about them.

I proceed now to examine some of these simple ideas and their modes a
little more particularly.




CHAPTER XII.
OF COMPLEX IDEAS.


1. Made by the Mind out of simple Ones.

We have hitherto considered those ideas, in the reception whereof the
mind is only passive, which are those simple ones received from
sensation and reflection before mentioned, whereof the mind cannot make
one to itself, nor have any idea which does not wholly consist of them.
As simple ideas are observed to exist in several combinations united
together, so the mind has a power to consider several of them united
together as one idea; and that not only as they are united in external
objects, but as itself has joined them together. Ideas thus made up of
several simple ones put together, I call COMPLEX;—such as are beauty,
gratitude, a man, an army, the universe; which, though complicated of
various simple ideas, or complex ideas made up of simple ones, yet are,
when the mind pleases, considered each by itself, as one entire thing,
signified by one name.

2. Made voluntarily.

In this faculty of repeating and joining together its ideas, the mind
has great power in varying and multiplying the objects of its thoughts,
infinitely beyond what sensation or reflection furnished it with: but
all this still confined to those simple ideas which it received from
those two sources, and which are the ultimate materials of all its
compositions. For simple ideas are all from things themselves, and of
these the mind CAN have no more, nor other than what are suggested to
it. It can have no other ideas of sensible qualities than what come
from without [*dropped word] the senses; nor any ideas of other kind of
operations of a thinking substance, than what it finds in itself. But
when it has once got these simple ideas, it is not confined barely to
observation, and what offers itself from without; it can, by its own
power, put together those ideas it has, and make new complex ones,
which it never received so united.

3. Complex ideas are either of Modes, Substances, or Relations.

COMPLEX IDEAS, however compounded and decompounded, though their number
be infinite, and the variety endless, wherewith they fill and entertain
the thoughts of men; yet I think they may be all reduced under these
three heads:—1. MODES. 2. SUBSTANCES. 3. RELATIONS.

4. Ideas of Modes.

First, MODES I call such complex ideas which, however compounded,
contain not in them the supposition of subsisting by themselves, but
are considered as dependences on, or affections of substances;—such as
are the ideas signified by the words triangle, gratitude, murder, &c.
And if in this I use the word mode in somewhat a different sense from
its ordinary signification, I beg pardon; it being unavoidable in
discourses, differing from the ordinary received notions, either to
make new words, or to use old words in somewhat a new signification;
the later whereof, in our present case, is perhaps the more tolerable
of the two.

5. Simple and mixed Modes of Ideas.

Of these MODES, there are two sorts which deserve distinct
consideration:—

First, there are some which are only variations, or different
combinations of the same simple idea, without the mixture of any
other;—as a dozen, or score; which are nothing but the ideas of so many
distinct units added together, and these I call SIMPLE MODES as being
contained within the bounds of one simple idea.

Secondly, there are others compounded of simple ideas of several kinds,
put together to make one complex one;—v.g. beauty, consisting of a
certain composition of colour and figure, causing delight to the
beholder; theft, which being the concealed change of the possession of
anything, without the consent of the proprietor, contains, as is
visible, a combination of several ideas of several kinds: and these I
call MIXED MODES.

6. Ideas of Substances, single or collective.

Secondly, the ideas of SUBSTANCES are such combinations of simple ideas
as are taken to represent distinct PARTICULAR things subsisting by
themselves; in which the supposed or confused idea of substance, such
as it is, is always the first and chief. Thus if to substance be joined
the simple idea of a certain dull whitish colour, with certain degrees
of weight, hardness, ductility, and fusibility, we have the idea of
lead; and a combination of the ideas of a certain sort of figure, with
the powers of motion, thought and reasoning, joined to substance, make
the ordinary idea of a man. Now of substances also, there are two sorts
of ideas:—one of SINGLE substances, as they exist separately, as of a
man or a sheep; the other of several of those put together, as an army
of men, or flock of sheep—which COLLECTIVE ideas of several substances
thus put together are as much each of them one single idea as that of a
man or an unit.

7. Ideas of Relation.

Thirdly, the last sort of complex ideas is that we call RELATION, which
consists in the consideration and comparing one idea with another.

Of these several kinds we shall treat in their order.

8. The abstrusest Ideas we can have are all from two Sources.

If we trace the progress of our minds, and with attention observe how
it repeats, adds together, and unites its simple ideas received from
sensation or reflection, it will lead us further than at first perhaps
we should have imagined. And, I believe, we shall find, if we warily
observe the originals of our notions, that EVEN THE MOST ABSTRUSE
IDEAS, how remote soever they may seem from sense, or from any
operations of our own minds, are yet only such as the understanding
frames to itself, by repeating and joining together ideas that it had
either from objects of sense, or from its own operations about them: so
that those even large and abstract ideas are derived from sensation or
reflection, being no other than what the mind, by the ordinary use of
its own faculties, employed about ideas received from objects of sense,
or from the operations it observes in itself about them, may, and does,
attain unto.

This I shall endeavour to show in the ideas we have of space, time, and
infinity, and some few others that seem the most remote, from those
originals.




CHAPTER XIII.
COMPLEX IDEAS OF SIMPLE MODES:—AND FIRST, OF THE SIMPLE MODES OF IDEA
OF SPACE.


1. Simple modes of simple ideas.

Though in the foregoing part I have often mentioned simple ideas, which
are truly the materials of all our knowledge; yet having treated of
them there, rather in the way that they come into the mind, than as
distinguished from others more compounded, it will not be perhaps amiss
to take a view of some of them again under this consideration, and
examine those different modifications of the SAME idea; which the mind
either finds in things existing, or is able to make within itself
without the help of any extrinsical object, or any foreign suggestion.

Those modifications of any ONE simple idea (which, as has been said, I
call SIMPLE MODES) are as perfectly different and distinct ideas in the
mind as those of the greatest distance or contrariety. For the idea of
two is as distinct from that of one, as blueness from heat, or either
of them from any number: and yet it is made up only of that simple idea
of an unit repeated; and repetitions of this kind joined together make
those distinct simple modes, of a dozen, a gross, a million. Simple
Modes of Idea of Space.

2. Idea of Space.

I shall begin with the simple idea of SPACE. I have showed above, chap.
4, that we get the idea of space, both by our sight and touch; which, I
think, is so evident, that it would be as needless to go to prove that
men perceive, by their sight, a distance between bodies of different
colours, or between the parts of the same body, as that they see
colours themselves: nor is it less obvious, that they can do so in the
dark by feeling and touch.

3. Space and Extension.

This space, considered barely in length between any two beings, without
considering anything else between them, is called DISTANCE: if
considered in length, breadth, and thickness, I think it may be called
CAPACITY. When considered between the extremities of matter, which
fills the capacity of space with something solid, tangible, and
moveable, it is properly called EXTENSION. And so extension is an idea
belonging to body only; but space may, as is evident, be considered
without it. At least I think it most intelligible, and the best way to
avoid confusion, if we use the word extension for an affection of
matter or the distance of the extremities of particular solid bodies;
and space in the more general signification, for distance, with or
without solid matter possessing it.

4. Immensity.

Each different distance is a different modification of space; and each
idea of any different distance, or space, is a SIMPLE MODE of this
idea. Men having, by accustoming themselves to stated lengths of space,
which they use for measuring other distances—as a foot, a yard or a
fathom, a league, or diameter of the earth—made those ideas familiar to
their thoughts, can, in their minds, repeat them as often as they will,
without mixing or joining to them the idea of body, or anything else;
and frame to themselves the ideas of long, square, or cubic feet, yards
or fathoms, here amongst the bodies of the universe, or else beyond the
utmost bounds of all bodies; and, by adding these still one to another,
enlarge their ideas of space as much as they please. The power of
repeating or doubling any idea we have of any distance, and adding it
to the former as often as we will, without being ever able to come to
any stop or stint, let us enlarge it as much as we will, is that which
gives us the idea of IMMENSITY.

5. Figure.

There is another modification of this idea, which is nothing but the
relation which the parts of the termination of extension, or
circumscribed space, have amongst themselves. This the touch discovers
in sensible bodies, whose extremities come within our reach; and the
eye takes both from bodies and colours, whose boundaries are within its
view: where, observing how the extremities terminate,—either in
straight lines which meet at discernible angles, or in crooked lines
wherein no angles can be perceived; by considering these as they relate
to one another, in all parts of the extremities of any body or space,
it has that idea we call FIGURE, which affords to the mind infinite
variety. For, besides the vast number of different figures that do
really exist in the coherent masses of matter, the stock that the mind
has in its power, by varying the idea of space, and thereby making
still new compositions, by repeating its own ideas, and joining them as
it pleases, is perfectly inexhaustible. And so it can multiply figures
IN INFINITUM.

6. Endless variety of figures.

For the mind having a power to repeat the idea of any length directly
stretched out, and join it to another in the same direction, which is
to double the length of that straight line; or else join another with
what inclination it thinks fit, and so make what sort of angle it
pleases: and being able also to shorten any line it imagines, by taking
from it one half, one fourth, or what part it pleases, without being
able to come to an end of any such divisions, it can make an angle of
any bigness. So also the lines that are its sides, of what length it
pleases, which joining again to other lines, of different lengths, and
at different angles, till it has wholly enclosed any space, it is
evident that it can multiply figures, both in their shape and capacity,
IN INFINITUM; all which are but so many different simple modes of
space.

The same that it can do with straight lines, it can also do with
crooked, or crooked and straight together; and the same it can do in
lines, it can also in superficies; by which we may be led into farther
thoughts of the endless variety of figures that the mind has a power to
make, and thereby to multiply the simple modes of space.

7. Place.

Another idea coming under this head, and belonging to this tribe, is
that we call PLACE. As in simple space, we consider the relation of
distance between any two bodies or points; so in our idea of place, we
consider the relation of distance betwixt anything, and any two or more
points, which are considered as keeping the same distance one with
another, and so considered as at rest. For when we find anything at the
same distance now which it was yesterday, from any two or more points,
which have not since changed their distance one with another, and with
which we then compared it, we say it hath kept the same place: but if
it hath sensibly altered its distance with either of those points, we
say it hath changed its place: though, vulgarly speaking, in the common
notion of place, we do not always exactly observe the distance from
these precise points, but from larger portions of sensible objects, to
which we consider the thing placed to bear relation, and its distance
from which we have some reason to observe.

8. Place relative to particular bodies.

Thus, a company of chess-men, standing on the same squares of the
chess-board where we left them, we say they are all in the SAME place,
or unmoved, though perhaps the chessboard hath been in the mean time
carried out of one room into another; because we compared them only to
the parts of the chess-board, which keep the same distance one with
another. The chess-board, we also say, is in the same place it was, if
it remain in the same part of the cabin, though perhaps the ship which
it is in sails all the while. And the ship is said to be in the same
place, supposing it kept the same distance with the parts of the
neighbouring land; though perhaps the earth hath turned round, and so
both chess-men, and board, and ship, have every one changed place, in
respect of remoter bodies, which have kept the same distance one with
another. But yet the distance from certain parts of the board being
that which determines the place of the chess-men; and the distance from
the fixed parts of the cabin (with which we made the comparison) being
that which determined the place of the chess-board; and the fixed parts
of the earth that by which we determined the place of the ship,—these
things may be said to be in the same place in those respects: though
their distance from some other things, which in this matter we did not
consider, being varied, they have undoubtedly changed place in that
respect; and we ourselves shall think so, when we have occasion to
compare them with those other.

9. Place relative to a present purpose.

But this modification of distance we call place, being made by men for
their common use, that by it they might be able to design the
particular position of things, where they had occasion for such
designation; men consider and determine of this place by reference to
those adjacent things which best served to their present purpose,
without considering other things which, to another purpose, would
better determine the place of the same thing. Thus in the chess-board,
the use of the designation of the place of each chess-man being
determined only within that chequered piece of wood, it would cross
that purpose to measure it by anything else; but when these very
chess-men are put up in a bag, if any one should ask where the black
king is, it would be proper to determine the place by the part of the
room it was in, and not by the chessboard; there being another use of
designing the place it is now in, than when in play it was on the
chessboard, and so must be determined by other bodies. So if any one
should ask, in what place are the verses which report the story of
Nisus and Euryalus, it would be very improper to determine this place,
by saying, they were in such a part of the earth, or in Bodley’s
library: but the right designation of the place would be by the parts
of Virgil’s works; and the proper answer would be, that these verses
were about the middle of the ninth book of his AEneids, and that they
have been always constantly in the same place ever since Virgil was
printed: which is true, though the book itself hath moved a thousand
times, the use of the idea of place here being, to know in what part of
the book that story is, that so, upon occasion, we may know where to
find it, and have recourse to it for use.

10. Place of the universe.

That our idea of place is nothing else but such a relative position of
anything as I have before mentioned, I think is plain, and will be
easily admitted, when we consider that we can have no idea of the place
of the universe, though we can of all the parts of it; because beyond
that we have not the idea of any fixed, distinct, particular beings, in
reference to which we can imagine it to have any relation of distance;
but all beyond it is one uniform space or expansion, wherein the mind
finds no variety, no marks. For to say that the world is somewhere,
means no more than that it does exist; this, though a phrase borrowed
from place, signifying only its existence, not location: and when one
can find out, and frame in his mind, clearly and distinctly the place
of the universe, he will be able to tell us whether it moves or stands
still in the undistinguishable inane of infinite space: though it be
true that the word place has sometimes a more confused sense, and
stands for that space which anybody takes up; and so the universe is in
a place. The idea, therefore, of place we have by the same means that
we get the idea of space, (whereof this is but a particular limited
consideration,) viz. by our sight and touch; by either of which we
receive into our minds the ideas of extension or distance.

11. Extension and Body not the same.

There are some that would persuade us, that body and extension are the
same thing, who either change the signification of words, which I would
not suspect them of,—they having so severely condemned the philosophy
of others, because it hath been too much placed in the uncertain
meaning, or deceitful obscurity of doubtful or insignificant terms. If,
therefore, they mean by body and extension the same that other people
do, viz. by BODY something that is solid and extended, whose parts are
separable and movable different ways; and by EXTENSION, only the space
that lies between the extremities of those solid coherent parts, and
which is possessed by them,—they confound very different ideas one with
another; for I appeal to every man’s own thoughts, whether the idea of
space be not as distinct from that of solidity, as it is from the idea
of scarlet colour? It is true, solidity cannot exist without extension,
neither can scarlet colour exist without extension, but this hinders
not, but that they are distinct ideas. Many ideas require others, as
necessary to their existence or conception, which yet are very distinct
ideas. Motion can neither be, nor be conceived, without space; and yet
motion is not space, nor space motion; space can exist without it, and
they are very distinct ideas; and so, I think, are those of space and
solidity. Solidity is so inseparable an idea from body, that upon that
depends its filling of space, its contact, impulse, and communication
of motion upon impulse. And if it be a reason to prove that spirit is
different from body, because thinking includes not the idea of
extension in it; the same reason will be as valid, I suppose, to prove
that space is not body, because it includes not the idea of solidity in
it; SPACE and SOLIDITY being as distinct ideas as THINKING and
EXTENSION, and as wholly separable in the mind one from another. Body
then and extension, it is evident, are two distinct ideas. For,

12. Extension not solidity.

First, Extension includes no solidity, nor resistance to the motion of
body, as body does.

13. The parts of space inseparable, both really and mentally.

Secondly, The parts of pure space are inseparable one from the other;
so that the continuity cannot be separated, both neither really nor
mentally. For I demand of any one to remove any part of it from
another, with which it is continued, even so much as in thought. To
divide and separate actually is, as I think, by removing the parts one
from another, to make two superficies, where before there was a
continuity: and to divide mentally is, to make in the mind two
superficies, where before there was a continuity, and consider them as
removed one from the other; which can only be done in things considered
by the mind as capable of being separated; and by separation, of
acquiring new distinct superficies, which they then have not, but are
capable of. But neither of these ways of separation, whether real or
mental, is, as I think, compatible to pure space.

It is true, a man may consider so much of such a space as is answerable
or commensurate to a foot, without considering the rest, which is,
indeed, a partial consideration, but not so much as mental separation
or division; since a man can no more mentally divide, without
considering two superficies separate one from the other, than he can
actually divide, without making two superficies disjoined one from the
other: but a partial consideration is not separating. A man may
consider light in the sun without its heat, or mobility in body without
its extension, without thinking of their separation. One is only a
partial consideration, terminating in one alone; and the other is a
consideration of both, as existing separately.

14. The parts of space immovable.

Thirdly, The parts of pure space are immovable, which follows from
their inseparability; motion being nothing but change of distance
between any two things; but this cannot be between parts that are
inseparable, which, therefore, must needs be at perpetual rest one
amongst another.

Thus the determined idea of simple space distinguishes it plainly and
sufficiently from body; since its parts are inseparable, immovable, and
without resistance to the motion of body.

15. The Definition of Extension explains it not.

If any one ask me WHAT this space I speak of IS, I will tell him when
he tells me what his extension is. For to say, as is usually done, that
extension is to have partes extra partes, is to say only, that
extension is extension. For what am I the better informed in the nature
of extension, when I am told that extension is to have parts that are
extended, exterior to parts that are extended, i. e. extension consists
of extended parts? As if one, asking what a fibre was, I should answer
him,—that it was a thing made up of several fibres. Would he thereby be
enabled to understand what a fibre was better than he did before? Or
rather, would he not have reason to think that my design was to make
sport with him, rather than seriously to instruct him?

16. Division of Beings into Bodies and Spirits proves not Space and
Body the same.

Those who contend that space and body are the same, bring this
dilemma:—either this space is something or nothing; if nothing be
between two bodies, they must necessarily touch; if it be allowed to be
something, they ask, Whether it be body or spirit? To which I answer by
another question, Who told them that there was, or could be, nothing;
but SOLID BEINGS, WHICH COULD NOT THINK, and THINKING BEINGS THAT WERE
NOT EXTENDED?—which is all they mean by the terms BODY and SPIRIT.

17. Substance, which we know not, no Proof against Space without Body.

If it be demanded (as usually it is) whether this space, void of body,
be SUBSTANCE or ACCIDENT, I shall readily answer I know not; nor shall
be ashamed to own my ignorance, till they that ask show me a clear
distinct idea of substance.

18. Different meanings of substance.

I endeavour as much as I can to deliver myself from those fallacies
which we are apt to put upon ourselves, by taking words for things. It
helps not our ignorance to feign a knowledge where we have none, by
making a noise with sounds, without clear and distinct significations.
Names made at pleasure, neither alter the nature of things, nor make us
understand them, but as they are signs of and stand for determined
ideas. And I desire those who lay so much stress on the sound of these
two syllables, SUBSTANCE, to consider whether applying it, as they do,
to the infinite, incomprehensible God, to finite spirits, and to body,
it be in the same sense; and whether it stands for the same idea, when
each of those three so different beings are called substances. If so,
whether it will thence follow—that God, spirits, and body, agreeing in
the same common nature of substance, differ not any otherwise than in a
bare different MODIFICATION of that substance; as a tree and a pebble,
being in the same sense body, and agreeing in the common nature of
body, differ only in a bare modification of that common matter, which
will be a very harsh doctrine. If they say, that they apply it to God,
finite spirit, and matter, in three different significations and that
it stands for one idea when God is said to be a substance; for another
when the soul is called substance; and for a third when body is called
so;—if the name substance stands for three several distinct ideas, they
would do well to make known those distinct ideas, or at least to give
three distinct names to them, to prevent in so important a notion the
confusion and errors that will naturally follow from the promiscuous
use of so doubtful a term; which is so far from being suspected to have
three distinct, that in ordinary use it has scarce one clear distinct
signification. And if they can thus make three distinct ideas of
substance, what hinders why another may not make a fourth?

19. Substance and accidents of little use in Philosophy.

They who first ran into the notion of ACCIDENTS, as a sort of real
beings that needed something to inhere in, were forced to find out the
word SUBSTANCE to support them. Had the poor Indian philosopher (who
imagined that the earth also wanted something to bear it up) but
thought of this word substance, he needed not to have been at the
trouble to find an elephant to support it, and a tortoise to support
his elephant: the word substance would have done it effectually. And he
that inquired might have taken it for as good an answer from an Indian
philosopher,—that substance, without knowing what it is, is that which
supports the earth, as take it for a sufficient answer and good
doctrine from our European philosophers,—that substance, without
knowing what it is, is that which supports accidents. So that of
substance, we have no idea of what it is, but only a confused obscure
one of what it does.

20. Sticking on and under-propping.

Whatever a learned man may do here, an intelligent American, who
inquired into the nature of things, would scarce take it for a
satisfactory account, if, desiring to learn our architecture, he should
be told that a pillar is a thing supported by a basis, and a basis
something that supported a pillar. Would he not think himself mocked,
instead of taught, with such an account as this? And a stranger to them
would be very liberally instructed in the nature of books, and the
things they contained, if he should be told that all learned books
consisted of paper and letters, and that letters were things inhering
in paper, and paper a thing that held forth letters: a notable way of
having clear ideas of letters and paper. But were the Latin words,
inhaerentia and substantio, put into the plain English ones that answer
them, and were called STICKING ON and UNDER-PROPPING, they would better
discover to us the very great clearness there is in the doctrine of
substance and accidents, and show of what use they are in deciding of
questions in philosophy.

21. A Vacuum beyond the utmost Bounds of Body.

But to return to our idea of space. If body be not supposed infinite,
(which I think no one will affirm,) I would ask, whether, if God placed
a man at the extremity of corporeal beings, he could not stretch his
hand beyond his body? If he could, then he would put his arm where
there was before space without body; and if there he spread his
fingers, there would still be space between them without body. If he
could not stretch out his hand, it must be because of some external
hindrance; (for we suppose him alive, with such a power of moving the
parts of his body that he hath now, which is not in itself impossible,
if God so pleased to have it; or at least it is not impossible for God
so to move him:) and then I ask,—whether that which hinders his hand
from moving outwards be substance or accident, something or nothing?
And when they have resolved that, they will be able to resolve
themselves,—what that is, which is or may be between two bodies at a
distance, that is not body, and has no solidity. In the mean time, the
argument is at least as good, that, where nothing hinders, (as beyond
the utmost bounds of all bodies,) a body put in motion may move on, as
where there is nothing between, there two bodies must necessarily
touch. For pure space between is sufficient to take away the necessity
of mutual contact; but bare space in the way is not sufficient to stop
motion. The truth is, these men must either own that they think body
infinite, though they are loth to speak it out, or else affirm that
space is not body. For I would fain meet with that thinking man that
can in his thoughts set any bounds to space, more than he can to
duration; or by thinking hope to arrive at the end of either. And
therefore, if his idea of eternity be infinite, so is his idea of
immensity; they are both finite or infinite alike.

22. The Power of Annihilation proves a Vacuum.

Farther, those who assert the impossibility of space existing without
matter, must not only make body infinite, but must also deny a power in
God to annihilate any part of matter. No one, I suppose, will deny that
God can put an end to all motion that is in matter, and fix all the
bodies of the universe in a perfect quiet and rest, and continue them
so long as he pleases. Whoever then will allow that God can, during
such a general rest, ANNIHILATE either this book or the body of him
that reads it, must necessarily admit the possibility of a vacuum. For,
it is evident that the space that was filled by the parts of the
annihilated body will still remain, and be a space without body. For
the circumambient bodies being in perfect rest, are a wall of adamant,
and in that state make it a perfect impossibility for any other body to
get into that space. And indeed the necessary motion of one particle of
matter into the place from whence another particle of matter is
removed, is but a consequence from the supposition of plenitude; which
will therefore need some better proof than a supposed matter of fact,
which experiment can never make out;—our own clear and distinct ideas
plainly satisfying that there is no necessary connexion between space
and solidity, since we can conceive the one without the other. And
those who dispute for or against a vacuum, do thereby confess they have
distinct IDEAS of vacuum and plenum, i. e. that they have an idea of
extension void of solidity, though they deny its EXISTENCE; or else
they dispute about nothing at all. For they who so much alter the
signification of words, as to call extension body, and consequently
make the whole essence of body to be nothing but pure extension without
solidity, must talk absurdly whenever they speak of vacuum; since it is
impossible for extension to be without extension. For vacuum, whether
we affirm or deny its existence, signifies space without body; whose
very existence no one can deny to be possible, who will not make matter
infinite, and take from God a power to annihilate any particle of it.

23. Motion proves a Vacuum.

But not to go so far as beyond the utmost bounds of body in the
universe, nor appeal to God’s omnipotency to find a vacuum, the motion
of bodies that are in our view and neighbourhood seems to me plainly to
evince it. For I desire any one so to divide a solid body, of any
dimension he pleases, as to make it possible for the solid parts to
move up and down freely every way within the bounds of that
superficies, if there be not left in it a void space as big as the
least part into which he has divided the said solid body. And if, where
the least particle of the body divided is as big as a mustard-seed, a
void space equal to the bulk of a mustard-seed be requisite to make
room for the free motion of the parts of the divided body within the
bounds of its superficies, where the particles of matter are
100,000,000 less than a mustard-seed, there must also be a space void
of solid matter as big as 100,000,000 part of a mustard-seed; for if it
hold in the one it will hold in the other, and so on IN INFINITUM. And
let this void space be as little as it will, it destroys the hypothesis
of plenitude. For if there can be a space void of body equal to the
smallest separate particle of matter now existing in nature, it is
still space without body; and makes as great a difference between space
and body as if it were mega chasma, a distance as wide as any in
nature. And therefore, if we suppose not the void space necessary to
motion equal to the least parcel of the divided solid matter, but to
1/10 or 1/1000 of it, the same consequence will always follow of space
without matter.

24. The Ideas of Space and Body distinct.

But the question being here,—Whether the idea of space or extension be
the same with the idea of body? it is not necessary to prove the real
existence of a VACUUM, but the idea of it; which it is plain men have
when they inquire and dispute whether there be a VACUUM or no. For if
they had not the idea of space without body, they could not make a
question about its existence: and if their idea of body did not include
in it something more than the bare idea of space, they could have no
doubt about the plenitude of the world; and it would be as absurd to
demand, whether there were space without body, as whether there were
space without space, or body without body, since these were but
different names of the same idea.

25. Extension being inseparable from Body, proves it not the same.

It is true, the idea of extension joins itself so inseparably with all
visible, and most tangible qualities, that it suffers us to SEE no one,
or FEEL very few external objects, without taking in impressions of
extension too. This readiness of extension to make itself be taken
notice of so constantly with other ideas, has been the occasion, I
guess, that some have made the whole essence of body to consist in
extension; which is not much to be wondered at, since some have had
their minds, by their eyes and touch, (the busiest of all our senses,)
so filled with the idea of extension, and, as it were, wholly possessed
with it, that they allowed no existence to anything that had not
extension. I shall not now argue with those men, who take the measure
and possibility of all being only from their narrow and gross
imaginations: but having here to do only with those who conclude the
essence of body to be extension, because they say they cannot imagine
any sensible quality of any body without extension,—I shall desire them
to consider, that, had they reflected on their ideas of tastes and
smells as much as on those of sight and touch; nay, had they examined
their ideas of hunger and thirst, and several other pains, they would
have found that THEY included in them no idea of extension at all,
which is but an affection of body, as well as the rest, discoverable by
our senses, which are scarce acute enough to look into the pure
essences of things.

26. Essences of Things.

If those ideas which are constantly joined to all others, must
therefore be concluded to be the essence of those things which have
constantly those ideas joined to them, and are inseparable from them;
then unity is without doubt the essence of everything. For there is not
any object of sensation or reflection which does not carry with it the
idea of one: but the weakness of this kind of argument we have already
shown sufficiently.

27. Ideas of Space and Solidity distinct.

To conclude: whatever men shall think concerning the existence of a
VACUUM, this is plain to me—that we have as clear an idea of space
distinct from solidity, as we have of solidity distinct from motion, or
motion from space. We have not any two more distinct ideas; and we can
as easily conceive space without solidity, as we can conceive body or
space without motion, though it be never so certain that neither body
nor motion can exist without space. But whether any one will take space
to be only a RELATION resulting from the existence of other beings at a
distance; or whether they will think the words of the most knowing King
Solomon, ‘The heaven, and the heaven of heavens, cannot contain thee;’
or those more emphatical ones of the inspired philosopher St. Paul, ‘In
him we live, move, and have our being,’ are to be understood in a
literal sense, I leave every one to consider: only our idea of space
is, I think, such as I have mentioned, and distinct from that of body.
For, whether we consider, in matter itself, the distance of its
coherent solid parts, and call it, in respect of those solid parts,
extension; or whether, considering it as lying between the extremities
of any body in its several dimensions, we call it length, breadth, and
thickness; or else, considering it as lying between any two bodies or
positive beings, without any consideration whether there be any matter
or not between, we call it distance;—however named or considered, it is
always the same uniform simple idea of space, taken from objects about
which our senses have been conversant; whereof, having settled ideas in
our minds, we can revive, repeat, and add them one to another as often
as we will, and consider the space or distance so imagined, either as
filled with solid parts, so that another body cannot come there without
displacing and thrusting out the body that was there before; or else as
void of solidity, so that a body of equal dimensions to that empty or
pure space may be placed in it, without the removing or expulsion of
anything that was there.

28. Men differ little in clear, simple ideas.

The knowing precisely what our words stand for, would, I imagine, in
this as well as a great many other cases, quickly end the dispute. For
I am apt to think that men, when they come to examine them, find their
simple ideas all generally to agree, though in discourse with one
another they perhaps confound one another with different names. I
imagine that men who abstract their thoughts, and do well examine the
ideas of their own minds, cannot much differ in thinking; however they
may perplex themselves with words, according to the way of speaking of
the several schools or sects they have been bred up in: though amongst
unthinking men, who examine not scrupulously and carefully their own
ideas, and strip them not from the marks men use for them, but confound
them with words, there must be endless dispute, wrangling, and jargon;
especially if they be learned, bookish men, devoted to some sect, and
accustomed to the language of it, and have learned to talk after
others. But if it should happen that any two thinking men should really
have different ideas, I do not see how they could discourse or argue
one with another. Here I must not be mistaken, to think that every
floating imagination in men’s brains is presently of that sort of ideas
I speak of. It is not easy for the mind to put off those confused
notions and prejudices it has imbibed from custom, inadvertency, and
common conversation. It requires pains and assiduity to examine its
ideas, till it resolves them into those clear and distinct simple ones,
out of which they are compounded; and to see which, amongst its simple
ones, have or have not a NECESSARY connexion and dependence one upon
another. Till a man doth this in the primary and original notions of
things, he builds upon floating and uncertain principles, and will
often find himself at a loss.




CHAPTER XIV.
IDEA OF DURATION AND ITS SIMPLE MODES.


1. Duration is fleeting Extension.

There is another sort of distance, or length, the idea whereof we get
not from the permanent parts of space, but from the fleeting and
perpetually perishing parts of succession. This we call DURATION; the
simple modes whereof are any different lengths of it whereof we have
distinct ideas, as HOURS, DAYS, YEARS, &c., TIME and ETERNITY.

2. Its Idea from Reflection on the Train of our Ideas.

The answer of a great man, to one who asked what time was: Si non rogas
intelligo, (which amounts to this; The more I set myself to think of
it, the less I understand it,) might perhaps persuade one that time,
which reveals all other things, is itself not to be discovered.
Duration, time, and eternity, are, not without reason, thought to have
something very abstruse in their nature. But however remote these may
seem from our comprehension, yet if we trace them right to their
originals, I doubt not but one of those sources of all our knowledge,
viz. sensation and reflection, will be able to furnish us with these
ideas, as clear and distinct as many others which are thought much less
obscure; and we shall find that the idea of eternity itself is derived
from the same common original with the rest of our ideas.

3. Nature and origin of the idea of Duration.

To understand TIME and ETERNITY aright, we ought with attention to
consider what idea it is we have of DURATION, and how we came by it. It
is evident to any one who will but observe what passes in his own mind,
that there is a train of ideas which constantly succeed one another in
his understanding, as long as he is awake. Reflection on these
appearances of several ideas one after another in our minds, is that
which furnishes us with the idea of SUCCESSION: and the distance
between any parts of that succession, or between the appearance of any
two ideas in our minds, is that we call DURATION. For whilst we are
thinking, or whilst we receive successively several ideas in our minds,
we know that we do exist; and so we call the existence, or the
continuation of the existence of ourselves, or anything else,
commensurate to the succession of any ideas in our minds, the duration
of ourselves, or any such other thing co-existent with our thinking.

4. Proof that its idea is got from reflection on the train of our
ideas.

That we have our notion of succession and duration from this original,
viz. from reflection on the train of ideas, which we find to appear one
after another in our own minds, seems plain to me, in that we have no
perception of duration but by considering the train of ideas that take
their turns in our understandings. When that succession of ideas
ceases, our perception of duration ceases with it; which every one
clearly experiments in himself, whilst he sleeps soundly, whether an
hour or a day, a month or a year; of which duration of things, while he
sleeps or thinks not, he has no perception at all, but it is quite lost
to him; and the moment wherein he leaves off to think, till the moment
he begins to think again, seems to him to have no distance. And so I
doubt not it would be to a waking man, if it were possible for him to
keep ONLY ONE idea in his mind, without variation and the succession of
others. And we see, that one who fixes his thoughts very intently on
one thing, so as to take but little notice of the succession of ideas
that pass in his mind whilst he is taken up with that earnest
contemplation, lets slip out of his account a good part of that
duration, and thinks that time shorter than it is. But if sleep
commonly unites the distant parts of duration, it is because during
that time we have no succession of ideas in our minds. For if a man,
during his sleep, dreams, and variety of ideas make themselves
perceptible in his mind one after another, he hath then, during such
dreaming, a sense of duration, and of the length of it. By which it is
to me very clear, that men derive their ideas of duration from their
reflections on the train of the ideas they observe to succeed one
another in their own understandings; without which observation they can
have no notion of duration, whatever may happen in the world.

5. The Idea of Duration applicable to Things whilst we sleep.

Indeed a man having, from reflecting on the succession and number of
his own thoughts, got the notion or idea of duration, he can apply that
notion to things which exist while he does not think; as he that has
got the idea of extension from bodies by his sight or touch, can apply
it to distances, where no body is seen or felt. And therefore, though a
man has no perception of the length of duration which passed whilst he
slept or thought not; yet, having observed the revolution of days and
nights, and found the length of their duration to be in appearance
regular and constant, he can, upon the supposition that that revolution
has proceeded after the same manner whilst he was asleep or thought
not, as it used to do at other times, he can, I say, imagine and make
allowance for the length of duration whilst he slept. But if Adam and
Eve, (when they were alone in the world,) instead of their ordinary
night’s sleep, had passed the whole twenty-four hours in one continued
sleep, the duration of that twenty-four hours had been irrecoverably
lost to them, and been for ever left out of their account of time.

6. The Idea of Succession not from Motion.

Thus by reflecting on the appearing of various ideas one after another
in our understandings, we get the notion of succession; which, if any
one should think we did rather get from our observation of motion by
our senses, he will perhaps be of my mind when he considers, that even
motion produces in his mind an idea of succession no otherwise than as
it produces there a continued train of distinguishable ideas. For a man
looking upon a body really moving, perceives yet no motion at all
unless that motion produces a constant train of successive ideas: v.g.
a man becalmed at sea, out of sight of land, in a fair day, may look on
the sun, or sea, or ship, a whole hour together, and perceive no motion
at all in either; though it be certain that two, and perhaps all of
them, have moved during that time a great way. But as soon as he
perceives either of them to have changed distance with some other body,
as soon as this motion produces any new idea in him, then he perceives
that there has been motion. But wherever a man is, with all things at
rest about him, without perceiving any motion at all,—if during this
hour of quiet he has been thinking, he will perceive the various ideas
of his own thoughts in his own mind, appearing one after another, and
thereby observe and find succession where he could observe no motion.

7. Very slow motions unperceived.

And this, I think, is the reason why motions very slow, though they are
constant, are not perceived by us; because in their remove from one
sensible part towards another, their change of distance is so slow,
that it causes no new ideas in us, but a good while one after another.
And so not causing a constant train of new ideas to follow one another
immediately in our minds, we have no perception of motion; which
consisting in a constant succession, we cannot perceive that succession
without a constant succession of varying ideas arising from it.

8. Very swift motions unperceived.

On the contrary, things that move so swift as not to affect the senses
distinctly with several distinguishable distances of their motion, and
so cause not any train of ideas in the mind, are not also perceived.
For anything that moves round about in a circle, in less times than our
ideas are wont to succeed one another in our minds, is not perceived to
move; but seems to be a perfect entire circle of the matter or colour,
and not a part of a circle in motion.

9. The Train of Ideas has a certain Degree of Quickness.

Hence I leave it to others to judge, whether it be not probable that
our ideas do, whilst we are awake, succeed one another in our minds at
certain distances; not much unlike the images in the inside of a
lantern, turned round by the heat of a candle. This appearance of
theirs in train, though perhaps it may be sometimes faster and
sometimes slower, yet, I guess, varies not very much in a waking man:
there seem to be certain bounds to the quickness and slowness of the
succession of those ideas one to another in our minds, beyond which
they can neither delay nor hasten.

10. Real succession in swift motions without sense of succession.

The reason I have for this odd conjecture is, from observing that, in
the impressions made upon any of our senses, we can but to a certain
degree perceive any succession; which, if exceeding quick, the sense of
succession is lost, even in cases where it is evident that there is a
real succession. Let a cannon-bullet pass through a room, and in its
way take with it any limb, or fleshy parts of a man, it is as clear as
any demonstration can be, that it must strike successively the two
sides of the room: it is also evident, that it must touch one part of
the flesh first, and another after, and so in succession: and yet, I
believe, nobody who ever felt the pain of such a shot, or heard the
blow against the two distant walls, could perceive any succession
either in the pain or sound of so swift a stroke. Such a part of
duration as this, wherein we perceive no succession, is that which we
call an INSTANT, and is that which takes up the time of only one idea
in our minds, without the succession of another; wherein, therefore, we
perceive no succession at all.

11. In slow motions.

This also happens where the motion is so slow as not to supply a
constant train of fresh ideas to the senses, as fast as the mind is
capable of receiving new ones into it; and so other ideas of our own
thoughts, having room to come into our minds between those offered to
our senses by the moving body, there the sense of motion is lost; and
the body, though it really moves, yet, not changing perceivable
distance with some other bodies as fast as the ideas of our own minds
do naturally follow one another in train, the thing seems to stand
still; as is evident in the hands of clocks, and shadows of sun-dials,
and other constant but slow motions, where, though, after certain
intervals, we perceive, by the change of distance, that it hath moved,
yet the motion itself we perceive not.

12. This Train, the Measure of other Successions.

So that to me it seems, that the constant and regular succession of
IDEAS in a waking man, is, as it were, the measure and standard of all
other successions. Whereof if any one either exceeds the pace of our
ideas, as where two sounds or pains, &c., take up in their succession
the duration of but one idea; or else where any motion or succession is
so slow, as that it keeps not pace with the ideas in our minds, or the
quickness in which they take their turns, as when any one or more ideas
in their ordinary course come into our mind, between those which are
offered to the sight by the different perceptible distances of a body
in motion, or between sounds or smells following one another,—there
also the sense of a constant continued succession is lost, and we
perceive it not, but with certain gaps of rest between.

13. The Mind cannot fix long on one invariable Idea.

If it be so, that the ideas of our minds, whilst we have any there, do
constantly change and shift in a continual succession, it would be
impossible, may any one say, for a man to think long of any one thing.
By which, if it be meant that a man may have one self-same single idea
a long time alone in his mind, without any variation at all, I think,
in matter of fact, it is not possible. For which (not knowing how the
ideas of our minds are framed, of what materials they are made, whence
they have their light, and how they come to make their appearances) I
can give no other reason but experience: and I would have any one try,
whether he can keep one unvaried single idea in his mind, without any
other, for any considerable time together.

14. Proof.

For trial, let him take any figure, any degree of light or whiteness,
or what other he pleases, and he will, I suppose, find it difficult to
keep all other ideas out of his mind; but that some, either of another
kind, or various considerations of that idea, (each of which
considerations is a new idea,) will constantly succeed one another in
his thoughts, let him be as wary as he can.

15. The extent of our power over the succession of our ideas.

All that is in a man’s power in this case, I think, is only to mind and
observe what the ideas are that take their turns in his understanding;
or else to direct the sort, and call in such as he hath a desire or use
of: but hinder the constant succession of fresh ones, I think he
cannot, though he may commonly choose whether he will heedfully observe
and consider them.

16. Ideas, however made, include no sense of motion.

Whether these several ideas in a man’s mind be made by certain motions,
I will not here dispute; but this I am sure, that they include no idea
of motion in their appearance; and if a man had not the idea of motion
otherwise, I think he would have none at all, which is enough to my
present purpose; and sufficiently shows that the notice we take of the
ideas of our own minds, appearing there one after another, is that
which gives us the idea of succession and duration, without which we
should have no such ideas at all. It is not then MOTION, but the
constant train of IDEAS in our minds whilst we are waking, that
furnishes us with the idea of duration; whereof motion no otherwise
gives us any perception than as it causes in our minds a constant
succession of ideas, as I have before showed: and we have as clear an
idea of succession and duration, by the train of other ideas succeeding
one another in our minds, without the idea of any motion, as by the
train of ideas caused by the uninterrupted sensible change of distance
between two bodies, which we have from motion; and therefore we should
as well have the idea of duration were there no sense of motion at all.

17. Time is Duration set out by Measures.

Having thus got the idea of duration, the next thing natural for the
mind to do, is to get some measure of this common duration, whereby it
might judge of its different lengths, and consider the distinct order
wherein several things exist; without which a great part of our
knowledge would be confused, and a great part of history be rendered
very useless. This consideration of duration, as set out by certain
periods and marked by certain measures or epochs, is that, I think,
which most properly we call TIME.

18. A good Measure of Time must divide its whole Duration into equal
Periods.

In the measuring of extension, there is nothing more required but the
application of the standard or measure we make use of to the thing of
whose extension we would be informed. But in the measuring of duration
this cannot be done, because no two different parts of succession can
be put together to measure one another. And nothing being a measure of
duration but duration, as nothing is of extension but extension, we
cannot keep by us any standing, unvarying measure of duration, which
consists in a constant fleeting succession, as we can of certain
lengths of extension, as inches, feet, yards, &c., marked out in
permanent parcels of matter. Nothing then could serve well for a
convenient measure of time, but what has divided the whole length of
its duration into apparently equal portions, by constantly repeated
periods. What portions of duration are not distinguished, or considered
as distinguished and measured, by such periods, come not so properly
under the notion of time; as appears by such phrases as these, viz.
‘Before all time,’ and ‘When time shall be no more.’

19. The Revolutions of the Sun and Moon, the properest Measures of Time
for mankind.

The diurnal and annual revolutions of the sun, as having been, from the
beginning of nature, constant, regular, and universally observable by
all mankind, and supposed equal to one another, have been with reason
made use of for the measure of duration. But the distinction of days
and years having depended on the motion of the sun, it has brought this
mistake with it, that it has been thought that motion and duration were
the measure one of another. For men, in the measuring of the length of
time, having been accustomed to the ideas of minutes, hours, days,
months, years, &c., which they found themselves upon any mention of
time or duration presently to think on, all which portions of time were
measured out by the motion of those heavenly bodies, they were apt to
confound time and motion; or at least to think that they had a
necessary connexion one with another. Whereas any constant periodical
appearance, or alteration of ideas, in seemingly equidistant spaces of
duration, if constant and universally observable, would have as well
distinguished the intervals of time, as those that have been made use
of. For, supposing the sun, which some have taken to be a fire, had
been lighted up at the same distance of time that it now every day
comes about to the same meridian, and then gone out again about twelve
hours after, and that in the space of an annual revolution it had
sensibly increased in brightness and heat, and so decreased
again,—would not such regular appearances serve to measure out the
distances of duration to all that could observe it, as well without as
with motion? For if the appearances were constant, universally
observable, in equidistant periods, they would serve mankind for
measure of time as well were the motion away.

20. But not by their Motion, but periodical Appearances.

For the freezing of water, or the blooming of a plant, returning at
equidistant periods in all parts of the earth, would as well serve men
to reckon their years by, as the motions of the sun: and in effect we
see, that some people in America counted their years by the coming of
certain birds amongst them at their certain seasons, and leaving them
at others. For a fit of an ague; the sense of hunger or thirst; a smell
or a taste; or any other idea returning constantly at equidistant
periods, and making itself universally be taken notice of, would not
fail to measure out the course of succession, and distinguish the
distances of time. Thus we see that men born blind count time well
enough by years, whose revolutions yet they cannot distinguish by
motions that they perceive not. And I ask whether a blind man, who
distinguished his years either by the heat of summer, or cold of
winter; by the smell of any flower of the spring, or taste of any fruit
of the autumn, would not have a better measure of time than the Romans
had before the reformation of their calendar by Julius Caesar, or many
other people, whose years, notwithstanding the motion of the sun, which
they pretended to make use of, are very irregular? And it adds no small
difficulty to chronology, that the exact lengths of the years that
several nations counted by, are hard to be known, they differing very
much one from another, and I think I may say all of them from the
precise motion of the sun. And if the sun moved from the creation to
the flood constantly in the equator, and so equally dispersed its light
and heat to all the habitable parts of the earth, in days all of the
same length without its annual variations to the tropics, as a late
ingenious author supposes, I do not think it very easy to imagine, that
(notwithstanding the motion of the sun) men should in the antediluvian
world, from the beginning, count by years, or measure their time by
periods that had no sensible mark very obvious to distinguish them by.

21. No two Parts of Duration can be certainly known to be equal.

But perhaps it will be said,—without a regular motion, such as of the
sun, or some other, how could it ever be known that such periods were
equal? To which I answer,—the equality of any other returning
appearances might be known by the same way that that of days was known,
or presumed to be so at first; which was only by judging of them by the
train of ideas which had passed in men’s minds in the intervals; by
which train of ideas discovering inequality in the natural days, but
none in the artificial days, the artificial days, or nuchthaemera, were
guessed to be equal, which was sufficient to make them serve for a
measure; though exacter search has since discovered inequality in the
diurnal revolutions of the sun, and we know not whether the annual also
be not unequal. These yet, by their presumed and apparent equality,
serve as well to reckon time by (though not to measure the parts of
duration exactly) as if they could be proved to be exactly equal. We
must, therefore, carefully distinguish betwixt duration itself, and the
measures we make use of to judge of its length. Duration, in itself, is
to be considered as going on in one constant, equal, uniform course:
but none of the measures of it which we make use of can be KNOWN to do
so, nor can we be assured that their assigned parts or periods are
equal in duration one to another; for two successive lengths of
duration, however measured, can never be demonstrated to be equal. The
motion of the sun, which the world used so long and so confidently for
an exact measure of duration, has, as I said, been found in its several
parts unequal. And though men have, of late, made use of a pendulum, as
a more steady and regular motion than that of the sun, or, (to speak
more truly,) of the earth;—yet if any one should be asked how he
certainly knows that the two successive swings of a pendulum are equal,
it would be very hard to satisfy him that they are infallibly so; since
we cannot be sure that the cause of that motion, which is unknown to
us, shall always operate equally; and we are sure that the medium in
which the pendulum moves is not constantly the same: either of which
varying, may alter the equality of such periods, and thereby destroy
the certainty and exactness of the measure by motion, as well as any
other periods of other appearances; the notion of duration still
remaining clear, though our measures of it cannot (any of them) be
demonstrated to be exact. Since then no two portions of succession can
be brought together, it is impossible ever certainly to know their
equality. All that we can do for a measure of time is, to take such as
have continual successive appearances at seemingly equidistant periods;
of which seeming equality we have no other measure, but such as the
train of our own ideas have lodged in our memories, with the
concurrence of other PROBABLE reasons, to persuade us of their
equality.

22. Time not the Measure of Motion

One thing seems strange to me,—that whilst all men manifestly measured
time by the motion of the great and visible bodies of the world, time
yet should be defined to be the ‘measure of motion’: whereas it is
obvious to every one who reflects ever so little on it, that to measure
motion, space is as necessary to be considered as time; and those who
look a little farther will find also the bulk of the thing moved
necessary to be taken into the computation, by any one who will
estimate or measure motion so as to judge right of it. Nor indeed does
motion any otherwise conduce to the measuring of duration, than as it
constantly brings about the return of certain sensible ideas, in
seeming equidistant periods. For if the motion of the sun were as
unequal as of a ship driven by unsteady winds, sometimes very slow, and
at others irregularly very swift; or if, being constantly equally
swift, it yet was not circular, and produced not the same
appearances,—it would not at all help us to measure time, any more than
the seeming unequal motion of a comet does.

23. Minutes, hours, days, and years are, then, no more Minutes, Hours,
Days, and Years not necessary Measures of duration, necessary to time
or duration, than inches, feet, yards, and miles, marked out in any
matter, are to extension. For, though we in this part of the universe,
by the constant use of them, as of periods set out by the revolutions
of the sun, or as known parts of such periods, have fixed the ideas of
such lengths of duration in our minds, which we apply to all parts of
time whose lengths we would consider; yet there may be other parts of
the universe, where they no more use these measures of ours, than in
Japan they do our inches, feet, or miles; but yet something analogous
to them there must be. For without some regular periodical returns, we
could not measure ourselves, or signify to others, the length of any
duration; though at the same time the world were as full of motion as
it is now, but no part of it disposed into regular and apparently
equidistant revolutions. But the different measures that may be made
use of for the account of time, do not at all alter the notion of
duration, which is the thing to be measured; no more than the different
standards of a foot and a cubit alter the notion of extension to those
who make use of those different measures.

24. Our Measure of Time applicable to Duration before Time.

The mind having once got such a measure of time as the annual
revolution of the sun, can apply that measure to duration wherein that
measure itself did not exist, and with which, in the reality of its
being, it had nothing to do. For should one say, that Abraham was born
in the two thousand seven hundred and twelfth year of the Julian
period, it is altogether as intelligible as reckoning from the
beginning of the world, though there were so far back no motion of the
sun, nor any motion at all. For, though the Julian period be supposed
to begin several hundred years before there were really either days,
nights, or years, marked out by any revolutions of the sun,—yet we
reckon as right, and thereby measure durations as well, as if really at
that time the sun had existed, and kept the same ordinary motion it
doth now. The idea of duration equal to an annual revolution of the
sun, is as easily APPLICABLE in our thoughts to duration, where no sun
or motion was, as the idea of a foot or yard, taken from bodies here,
can be applied in our thoughts to distances beyond the confines of the
world, where are no bodies at all.

25. As we can measure space in our thoughts where there is no body.

For supposing it were 5639 miles, or millions of miles, from this place
to the remotest body of the universe, (for, being finite, it must be at
a certain distance,) as we suppose it to be 5639 years from this time
to the first existence of any body in the beginning of the world;—we
can, in our thoughts, apply this measure of a year to duration before
the creation, or beyond the duration of bodies or motion, as we can
this measure of a mile to space beyond the utmost bodies; and by the
one measure duration, where there was no motion, as well as by the
other measure space in our thoughts, where there is no body.

26. The assumption that the world is neither boundless nor eternal.

If it be objected to me here, that, in this way of explaining of time,
I have begged what I should not, viz. that the world is neither eternal
nor infinite; I answer, That to my present purpose it is not needful,
in this place, to make use of arguments to evince the world to be
finite both in duration and extension. But it being at least as
conceivable as the contrary, I have certainly the liberty to suppose
it, as well as any one hath to suppose the contrary; and I doubt not,
but that every one that will go about it, may easily conceive in his
mind the beginning of motion, though not of all duration, and so may
come to a step and non ultra in his consideration of motion. So also,
in his thoughts, he may set limits to body, and the extension belonging
to it; but not to space, where no body is, the utmost bounds of space
and duration being beyond the reach of thought, as well as the utmost
bounds of number are beyond the largest comprehension of the mind; and
all for the same reason, as we shall see in another place.

27. Eternity.

By the same means, therefore, and from the same original that we come
to have the idea of time, we have also that idea which we call
Eternity; viz. having got the idea of succession and duration, by
reflecting on the train of our own ideas, caused in us either by the
natural appearances of those ideas coming constantly of themselves into
our waking thoughts, or else caused by external objects successively
affecting our senses; and having from the revolutions of the sun got
the ideas of certain lengths of duration,—we can in our thoughts add
such lengths of duration to one another, as often as we please, and
apply them, so added, to durations past or to come. And this we can
continue to do on, without bounds or limits, and proceed in infinitum,
and apply thus the length of the annual motion of the sun to duration,
supposed before the sun’s or any other motion had its being, which is
no more difficult or absurd, than to apply the notion I have of the
moving of a shadow one hour to-day upon the sun-dial to the duration of
something last night, v. g. the burning of a candle, which is now
absolutely separate from all actual motion; and it is as impossible for
the duration of that flame for an hour last night to co-exist with any
motion that now is, or for ever shall be, as for any part of duration,
that was before the beginning of the world, to co exist with the motion
of the sun now. But yet this hinders not but that, having the IDEA of
the length of the motion of the shadow on a dial between the marks of
two hours, I can as distinctly measure in my thoughts the duration of
that candle-light last night, as I can the duration of anything that
does now exist: and it is no more than to think, that, had the sun
shone then on the dial, and moved after the same rate it doth now, the
shadow on the dial would have passed from one hour-line to another
whilst that flame of the candle lasted.

28. Our measures of Duration dependent on our ideas.

The notion of an hour, day, or year, being only the idea I have of the
length of certain periodical regular motions, neither of which motions
do ever all at once exist, but only in the ideas I have of them in my
memory derived from my senses or reflection; I can with the same ease,
and for the same reason, apply it in my thoughts to duration antecedent
to all manner of motion, as well as to anything that is but a minute or
a day antecedent to the motion that at this very moment the sun is in.
All things past are equally and perfectly at rest; and to this way of
consideration of them are all one, whether they were before the
beginning of the world, or but yesterday: the measuring of any duration
by some motion depending not at all on the REAL co-existence of that
thing to that motion, or any other periods of revolution, but the
having a clear IDEA of the length of some periodical known motion, or
other interval of duration, in my mind, and applying that to the
duration of the thing I would measure.

29. The Duration of anything need not be co-existent with the motion we
measure it by.

Hence we see that some men imagine the duration of of the world, from
its first existence to this present year 1689, to have been 5639 years,
or equal to 5639 annual revolutions of the sun, and others a great deal
more; as the Egyptians of old, who in the time of Alexander counted
23,000 years from the reign of the sun; and the Chinese now, who
account the world 3,269,000 years old, or more; which longer duration
of the world, according to their computation, though I should not
believe to be true, yet I can equally imagine it with them, and as
truly understand, and say one is longer than the other, as I
understand, that Methusalem’s life was longer than Enoch’s. And if the
common reckoning of 5639 should be true, (as it may be as well as any
other assigned,) it hinders not at all my imagining what others mean,
when they make the world one thousand years older, since every one may
with the same facility imagine (I do not say believe) the world to be
50,000 years old, as 5639; and may as well conceive the duration of
50,000 years as 5639. Whereby it appears that, to the measuring the
duration of anything by time, it is not requisite that that thing
should be co-existent to the motion we measure by, or any other
periodical revolution; but it suffices to this purpose, that we have
the idea of the length of ANY regular periodical appearances, which we
can in our minds apply to duration, with which the motion or appearance
never co-existed.

30. Infinity in Duration.

For, as in the history of the creation delivered by Moses, I can
imagine that light existed three days before the sun was, or had any
motion, barely by thinking that the duration of light before the sun
was created was so long as (IF the sun had moved then as it doth now)
would have been equal to three of his diurnal revolutions; so by the
same way I can have an idea of the chaos, or angels, being created
before there was either light or any continued motion, a minute, an
hour, a day, a year, or one thousand years. For, if I can but consider
duration equal to one minute, before either the being or motion of any
body, I can add one minute more till I come to sixty; and by the same
way of adding minutes, hours, or years (i.e. such or such parts of the
sun’s revolutions, or any other period whereof I have the idea) proceed
IN INFINITUM, and suppose a duration exceeding as many such periods as
I can reckon, let me add whilst I will, which I think is the notion we
have of eternity; of whose infinity we have no other notion than we
have of the infinity of number, to which we can add for ever without
end.

31. Origin of our Ideas of Duration, and of the measures of it.

And thus I think it is plain, that from those two fountains of all
knowledge before mentioned, viz. reflection and sensation, we got the
ideas of duration, and the measures of it.

For, First, by observing what passes in our minds, how our ideas there
in train constantly some vanish and others begin to appear, we come by
the idea of SUCCESSION. Secondly, by observing a distance in the parts
of this succession, we get the idea of DURATION.

Thirdly, by sensation observing certain appearances, at certain regular
and seeming equidistant periods, we get the ideas of certain LENGTHS or
MEASURES OF DURATION, as minutes, hours, days, years, &c.

Fourthly, by being able to repeat those measures of time, or ideas of
stated length of duration, in our minds, as often as we will, we can
come to imagine DURATION,—WHERE NOTHING DOES REALLY ENDURE OR EXIST;
and thus we imagine to-morrow, next year, or seven years hence.

Fifthly, by being able to repeat ideas of any length of time, as of a
minute, a year, or an age, as often as we will in our own thoughts, and
adding them one to another, without ever coming to the end of such
addition, any nearer than we can to the end of number, to which we can
always add; we come by the idea of ETERNITY, as the future eternal
duration of our souls, as well as the eternity of that infinite Being
which must necessarily have always existed.

Sixthly, by considering any part of infinite duration, as set out by
periodical measures, we come by the idea of what we call TIME in
general.




CHAPTER XV.
IDEAS OF DURATION AND EXPANSION, CONSIDERED TOGETHER.


1. Both capable of greater and less.

Though we have in the precedent chapters dwelt pretty long on the
considerations of space and duration, yet, they being ideas of general
concernment, that have something very abstruse and peculiar in their
nature, the comparing them one with another may perhaps be of use for
their illustration; and we may have the more clear and distinct
conception of them by taking a view of them together. Distance or
space, in its simple abstract conception, to avoid confusion, I call
EXPANSION, to distinguish it from extension, which by some is used to
express this distance only as it is in the solid parts of matter, and
so includes, or at least intimates, the idea of body: whereas the idea
of pure distance includes no such thing. I prefer also the word
expansion to space, because space is often applied to distance of
fleeting successive parts, which never exist together, as well as to
those which are permanent. In both these (viz. expansion and duration)
the mind has this common idea of continued lengths, capable of greater
or less quantities. For a man has as clear an idea of the difference of
the length of an hour and a day, as of an inch and a foot.

2. Expansion not bounded by Matter.

The mind, having got the idea of the length of any part of expansion,
let it be a span, or a pace, or what length you will, CAN, as has been
said, repeat that idea, and so, adding it to the former, enlarge its
idea of length, and make it equal to two spans, or two paces; and so,
as often as it will, till it equals the distance of any parts of the
earth one from another, and increase thus till it amounts to the
distance of the sun or remotest star. By such a progression as this,
setting out from the place where it is, or any other place, it can
proceed and pass beyond all those lengths, and find nothing to stop its
going on, either in or without body. It is true, we can easily in our
thoughts come to the end of SOLID extension; the extremity and bounds
of all body we have no difficulty to arrive at: but when the mind is
there, it finds nothing to hinder its progress into this endless
expansion; of that it can neither find nor conceive any end. Nor let
any one say, that beyond the bounds of body, there is nothing at all;
unless he will confine God within the limits of matter. Solomon, whose
understanding was filled and enlarged with wisdom, seems to have other
thoughts when he says, ‘Heaven, and the heaven of heavens, cannot
contain thee.’ And he, I think, very much magnifies to himself the
capacity of his own understanding, who persuades himself that he can
extend his thoughts further than God exists, or imagine any expansion
where He is not.

3. Nor Duration by Motion.

Just so is it in duration. The mind having got the idea of any length
of duration, can double, multiply, and enlarge it, not only beyond its
own, but beyond the existence of all corporeal beings, and all the
measures of time, taken from the great bodies of all the world and
their motions. But yet every one easily admits, that, though we make
duration boundless, as certainly it is, we cannot yet extend it beyond
all being. God, every one easily allows, fills eternity; and it is hard
to find a reason why any one should doubt that He likewise fills
immensity. His infinite being is certainly as boundless one way as
another; and methinks it ascribes a little too much to matter to say,
where there is no body, there is nothing.

4. Why Men more easily admit infinite Duration than infinite Expansion.

Hence I think we may learn the reason why every one familiarly and
without the least hesitation speaks of and supposes Eternity, and
sticks not to ascribe INFINITY to DURATION; but it is with more
doubting and reserve that many admit or suppose the INFINITY OF SPACE.
The reason whereof seems to me to be this,—That duration and extension
being used as names of affections belonging to other beings, we easily
conceive in God infinite duration, and we cannot avoid doing so: but,
not attributing to him extension, but only to matter, which is finite,
we are apter to doubt of the existence of expansion without matter; of
which alone we commonly suppose it an attribute. And, therefore, when
men pursue their thoughts of space, they are apt to stop at the
confines of body: as if space were there at an end too, and reached no
further. Or if their ideas, upon consideration, carry them further, yet
they term what is beyond the limits of the universe, imaginary space:
as if IT were nothing, because there is no body existing in it. Whereas
duration, antecedent to all body, and to the motions which it is
measured by, they never term imaginary: because it is never supposed
void of some other real existence. And if the names of things may at
all direct our thoughts towards the original of men’s ideas, (as I am
apt to think they may very much,) one may have occasion to think by the
name DURATION, that the continuation of existence, with a kind of
resistance to any destructive force, and the continuation of solidity
(which is apt to be confounded with, and if we will look into the
minute anatomical parts of matter, is little different from, hardness)
were thought to have some analogy, and gave occasion to words so near
of kin as durare and durum esse. And that durare is applied to the idea
of hardness, as well as that of existence, we see in Horace, Epod. xvi.
ferro duravit secula. But, be that as it will, this is certain, that
whoever pursues his own thoughts, will find them sometimes launch out
beyond the extent of body, into the infinity of space or expansion; the
idea whereof is distinct and separate from body and all other things:
which may, (to those who please,) be a subject of further meditation.

5. Time to Duration is as Place to Expansion.

Time in general is to duration as place to expansion. They are so much
of those boundless oceans of eternity and immensity as is set out and
distinguished from the rest, as it were by landmarks; and so are made
use of to denote the position of FINITE real beings, in respect one to
another, in those uniform infinite oceans of duration and space. These,
rightly considered, are only ideas of determinate distances from
certain known points, fixed in distinguishable sensible things, and
supposed to keep the same distance one from another. From such points
fixed in sensible beings we reckon, and from them we measure our
portions of those infinite quantities; which, so considered, are that
which we call TIME and PLACE. For duration and space being in
themselves uniform and boundless, the order and position of things,
without such known settled points, would be lost in them; and all
things would lie jumbled in an incurable confusion.

6. Time and Place are taken for so much of either as are set out by the
Existence and Motion of Bodies.

Time and place, taken thus for determinate distinguishable portions of
those infinite abysses of space and duration, set out or supposed to be
distinguished from the rest, by marks and known boundaries, have each
of them a twofold acceptation.

FIRST, Time in general is commonly taken for so much of infinite
duration as is measured by, and co-existent with, the existence and
motions of the great bodies of the universe, as far as we know anything
of them: and in this sense time begins and ends with the frame of this
sensible world, as in these phrases before mentioned, ‘Before all
time,’ or, ‘When time shall be no more.’ Place likewise is taken
sometimes for that portion of infinite space which is possessed by and
comprehended within the material world; and is thereby distinguished
from the rest of expansion; though this may be more properly called
extension than place. Within these two are confined, and by the
observable parts of them are measured and determined, the particular
time or duration, and the particular extension and place, of all
corporeal beings.

7. Sometimes for so much of either as we design by Measures taken from
the Bulk or Motion of Bodies.

SECONDLY, sometimes the word time is used in a larger sense, and is
applied to parts of that infinite duration, not that were really
distinguished and measured out by this real existence, and periodical
motions of bodies, that were appointed from the beginning to be for
signs and for seasons and for days and years, and are accordingly our
measures of time; but such other portions too of that infinite uniform
duration, which we upon any occasion do suppose equal to certain
lengths of measured time; and so consider them as bounded and
determined. For, if we should suppose the creation, or fall of the
angels, was at the beginning of the Julian period, we should speak
properly enough, and should be understood if we said, it is a longer
time since the creation of angels than the creation of the world, by
7640 years: whereby we would mark out so much of that undistinguished
duration as we suppose equal to, and would have admitted, 7640 annual
revolutions of the sun, moving at the rate it now does. And thus
likewise we sometimes speak of place, distance, or bulk, in the great
INANE, beyond the confines of the world, when we consider so much of
that space as is equal to, or capable to receive, a body of any
assigned dimensions, as a cubic foot; or do suppose a point in it, at
such a certain distance from any part of the universe.

8. They belong to all finite beings.

WHERE and WHEN are questions belonging to all finite existences, and
are by us always reckoned from some known parts of this sensible world,
and from some certain epochs marked out to us by the motions observable
in it. Without some such fixed parts or periods, the order of things
would be lost, to our finite understandings, in the boundless
invariable oceans of duration and expansion, which comprehend in them
all finite beings, and in their full extent belong only to the Deity.
And therefore we are not to wonder that we comprehend them not, and do
so often find our thoughts at a loss, when we would consider them,
either abstractly in themselves, or as any way attributed to the first
incomprehensible Being. But when applied to any particular finite
beings, the extension of any body is so much of that infinite space as
the bulk of the body takes up. And place is the position of any body,
when considered at a certain distance from some other. As the idea of
the particular duration of anything is, an idea of that portion of
infinite duration which passes during the existence of that thing; so
the time when the thing existed is, the idea of that space of duration
which passed between some known and fixed period of duration, and the
being of that thing. One shows the distance of the extremities of the
bulk or existence of the same thing, as that it is a foot square, or
lasted two years; the other shows the distance of it in place, or
existence from other fixed points of space or duration, as that it was
in the middle of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, or the first degree of Taurus,
and in the year of our Lord 1671, or the 1000th year of the Julian
period. All which distances we measure by preconceived ideas of certain
lengths of space and duration,—as inches, feet, miles, and degrees, and
in the other, minutes, days, and years, &c.

9. All the Parts of Extension are Extension, and all the Parts of
Duration are Duration.

There is one thing more wherein space and duration have a great
conformity, and that is, though they are justly reckoned amongst our
SIMPLE IDEAS, yet none of the distinct ideas we have of either is
without all manner of composition: it is the very nature of both of
them to consist of parts: but their parts being all of the same kind,
and without the mixture of any other idea, hinder them not from having
a place amongst simple ideas. Could the mind, as in number, come to so
small a part of extension or duration as excluded divisibility, THAT
would be, as it were, the indivisible unit or idea; by repetition of
which, it would make its more enlarged ideas of extension and duration.
But, since the mind is not able to frame an idea of ANY space without
parts, instead thereof it makes use of the common measures, which, by
familiar use in each country, have imprinted themselves on the memory
(as inches and feet; or cubits and parasangs; and so seconds, minutes,
hours, days, and years in duration);—the mind makes use, I say, of such
ideas as these, as simple ones: and these are the component parts of
larger ideas, which the mind upon occasion makes by the addition of
such known lengths which it is acquainted with. On the other side, the
ordinary smallest measure we have of either is looked on as an unit in
number, when the mind by division would reduce them into less
fractions. Though on both sides, both in addition and division, either
of space or duration, when the idea under consideration becomes very
big or very small, its precise bulk becomes very obscure and confused;
and it is the NUMBER of its repeated additions or divisions that alone
remains clear and distinct; as will easily appear to any one who will
let his thoughts loose in the vast expansion of space, or divisibility
of matter. Every part of duration is duration too; and every part of
extension is extension, both of them capable of addition or division in
infinitum. But THE LEAST PORTIONS OF EITHER OF THEM, WHEREOF WE HAVE
CLEAR AND DISTINCT IDEAS, may perhaps be fittest to be considered by
us, as the simple ideas of that kind out of which our complex modes of
space, extension, and duration are made up, and into which they can
again be distinctly resolved. Such a small part in duration may be
called a MOMENT, and is the time of one idea in our minds, in the train
of their ordinary succession there. The other, wanting a proper name, I
know not whether I may be allowed to call a SENSIBLE POINT, meaning
thereby the least particle of matter or space we can discern, which is
ordinarily about a minute, and to the sharpest eyes seldom less than
thirty seconds of a circle, whereof the eye is the centre.

10. Their Parts inseparable.

Expansion and duration have this further agreement, that, though they
are both considered by us as having parts, yet their parts are not
separable one from another, no not even in thought: though the parts of
bodies from whence we take our MEASURE of the one; and the parts of
motion, or rather the succession of ideas in our minds, from whence we
take the MEASURE of the other, may be interrupted and separated; as the
one is often by rest, and the other is by sleep, which we call rest
too.

11. Duration is as a Line, Expansion as a Solid.

But there is this manifest difference between them,—That the ideas of
length which we have of expansion are turned every way, and so make
figure, and breadth, and thickness; but duration is but as it were the
length of one straight line, extended in infinitum, not capable of
multiplicity, variation, or figure; but is one common measure of all
existence whatsoever, wherein all things, whilst they exist, equally
partake. For this present moment is common to all things that are now
in being, and equally comprehends that part of their existence, as much
as if they were all but one single being; and we may truly say, they
all exist in the SAME moment of time. Whether angels and spirits have
any analogy to this, in respect to expansion, is beyond my
comprehension: and perhaps for us, who have understandings and
comprehensions suited to our own preservation, and the ends of our own
being, but not to the reality and extent of all other beings, it is
near as hard to conceive any existence, or to have an idea of any real
being, with a perfect negation of all manner of expansion, as it is to
have the idea of any real existence with a perfect negation of all
manner of duration. And therefore, what spirits have to do with space,
or how they communicate in it, we know not. All that we know is, that
bodies do each singly possess its proper portion of it, according to
the extent of solid parts; and thereby exclude all other bodies from
having any share in that particular portion of space, whilst it remains
there.

12. Duration has never two Parts together, Expansion altogether.

DURATION, and TIME which is a part of it, is the idea we have of
PERISHING distance, of which no two parts exist together, but follow
each other in succession; an EXPANSION is the idea of LASTING distance,
all whose parts exist together and are not capable of succession. And
therefore, though we cannot conceive any duration without succession,
nor can put it together in our thoughts that any being does NOW exist
to-morrow, or possess at once more than the present moment of duration;
yet we can conceive the eternal duration of the Almighty far different
from that of man, or any other finite being. Because man comprehends
not in his knowledge or power all past and future things: his thoughts
are but of yesterday, and he knows not what to-morrow will bring forth.
What is once past he can never recall; and what is yet to come he
cannot make present. What I say of man, I say of all finite beings;
who, though they may far exceed man in knowledge and power, yet are no
more than the meanest creature, in comparison with God himself. Finite
or any magnitude holds not any proportion to infinite. God’s infinite
duration, being accompanied with infinite knowledge and infinite power,
he sees all things, past and to come; and they are no more distant from
his knowledge, no further removed from his sight, than the present:
they all lie under the same view: and there is nothing which he cannot
make exist each moment he pleases. For the existence of all things,
depending upon his good pleasure, all things exist every moment that he
thinks fit to have them exist. To conclude: expansion and duration do
mutually embrace and comprehend each other; every part of space being
in every part of duration, and every part of duration in every part of
expansion. Such a combination of two distinct ideas is, I suppose,
scarce to be found in all that great variety we do or can conceive, and
may afford matter to further speculation.




CHAPTER XVI.
IDEA OF NUMBER.


1. Number the simplest and most universal Idea.

Amongst all the ideas we have, as there is none suggested to the mind
by more ways, so there is none more simple, than that of UNITY, or one:
it has no shadow of variety or composition in it: every object our
senses are employed about; every idea in our understandings; every
thought of our minds, brings this idea along with it. And therefore it
is the most intimate to our thoughts, as well as it is, in its
agreement to all other things, the most universal idea we have. For
number applies itself to men, angels, actions, thoughts; everything
that either doth exist or can be imagined.

2. Its Modes made by Addition.

By repeating this idea in our minds, and adding the repetitions
together, we come by the COMPLEX ideas of the MODES of it. Thus, by
adding one to one, we have the complex idea of a couple; by putting
twelve units together we have the complex idea of a dozen; and so of a
score or a million, or any other number.

3. Each Mode distinct.

The SIMPLE MODES of NUMBER are of all other the most distinct; every
the least variation, which is an unit, making each combination as
clearly different from that which approacheth nearest to it, as the
most remote; two being as distinct from one, as two hundred; and the
idea of two as distinct from the idea of three, as the magnitude of the
whole earth is from that of a mite. This is not so in other simple
modes, in which it is not so easy, nor perhaps possible for us to
distinguish betwixt two approaching ideas, which yet are really
different. For who will undertake to find a difference between the
white of this paper and that of the next degree to it: or can form
distinct ideas of every the least excess in extension?

4. Therefore Demonstrations in Numbers the most precise.

The clearness and distinctness of each mode of number from all others,
even those that approach nearest, makes me apt to think that
demonstrations in numbers, if they are not more evident and exact than
in extension, yet they are more general in their use, and more
determinate in their application. Because the ideas of numbers are more
precise and distinguishable than in extension; where every equality and
excess are not so easy to be observed or measured; because our thoughts
cannot in space arrive at any determined smallness beyond which it
cannot go, as an unit; and therefore the quantity or proportion of any
the least excess cannot be discovered; which is clear otherwise in
number, where, as has been said, 91 is as distinguishable from 90 as
from 9000, though 91 be the next immediate excess to 90. But it is not
so in extension, where, whatsoever is more than just a foot or an inch,
is not distinguishable from the standard of a foot or an inch; and in
lines which appear of an equal length, one may be longer than the other
by innumerable parts: nor can any one assign an angle, which shall be
the next biggest to a right one.

5. Names necessary to Numbers.

By the repeating, as has been said, the idea of an unit, and joining it
to another unit, we make thereof one collective idea, marked by the
name two. And whosoever can do this, and proceed on, still adding one
more to the last collective idea which he had of any number, and gave a
name to it, may count, or have ideas, for several collections of units,
distinguished one from another, as far as he hath a series of names for
following numbers, and a memory to retain that series, with their
several names: all numeration being but still the adding of one unit
more, and giving to the whole together, as comprehended in one idea, a
new or distinct name or sign, whereby to know it from those before and
after, and distinguish it from every smaller or greater multitude of
units. So that he that can add one to one, and so to two, and so go on
with his tale, taking still with him the distinct names belonging to
every progression; and so again, by subtracting an unit from each
collection, retreat and lessen them, is capable of all the ideas of
numbers within the compass of his language, or for which he hath names,
though not perhaps of more. For, the several simple modes of numbers
being in our minds but so many combinations of units, which have no
variety, nor are capable of any other difference but more or less,
names or marks for each distinct combination seem more necessary than
in any other sort of ideas. For, without such names or marks, we can
hardly well make use of numbers in reckoning, especially where the
combination is made up of any great multitude of units; which put
together, without a name or mark to distinguish that precise
collection, will hardly be kept from being a heap in confusion.

6. Another reason for the necessity of names to numbers.

This I think to be the reason why some Americans I have spoken with,
(who were otherwise of quick and rational parts enough,) could not, as
we do, by any means count to 1000; nor had any distinct idea of that
number, though they could reckon very well to 20. Because their
language being scanty, and accommodated only to the few necessaries of
a needy, simple life, unacquainted either with trade or mathematics,
had no words in it to stand for 1000; so that when they were discoursed
with of those greater numbers, they would show the hairs of their head,
to express a great multitude, which they could not number; which
inability, I suppose, proceeded from their want of names. The
Tououpinambos had no names for numbers above 5; any number beyond that
they made out by showing their fingers, and the fingers of others who
were present. And I doubt not but we ourselves might distinctly number
in words a great deal further than we usually do, would we find out but
some fit denominations to signify them by; whereas, in the way we take
now to name them, by millions of millions of millions, &c., it is hard
to go beyond eighteen, or at most, four and twenty, decimal
progressions, without confusion. But to show how much distinct names
conduce to our well reckoning, or having useful ideas of numbers, let
us see all these following figures in one continued line, as the marks
of one number: v. g.

Nonillions. 857324

Octillions. 162486

Septillions. 345896

Sextillions. 437918

Quintrillions. 423147

Quartrillions. 248106

Trillions. 235421

Billions. 261734

Millions. 368149

Units. 623137

The ordinary way of naming this number in English, will be the often
repeating of millions, of millions, of millions, of millions, of
millions, of millions, of millions, of millions, (which is the
denomination of the second six figures). In which way, it will be very
hard to have any distinguishing notions of this number. But whether, by
giving every six figures a new and orderly denomination, these, and
perhaps a great many more figures in progression, might not easily be
counted distinctly, and ideas of them both got more easily to
ourselves, and more plainly signified to others, I leave it to be
considered. This I mention only to show how necessary distinct names
are to numbering, without pretending to introduce new ones of my
invention.

7. Why Children number not earlier.

Thus children, either for want of names to mark the several
progressions of numbers, or not having yet the faculty to collect
scattered ideas into complex ones, and range them in a regular order,
and so retain them in their memories, as is necessary to reckoning, do
not begin to number very early, nor proceed in it very far or steadily,
till a good while after they are well furnished with good store of
other ideas: and one may often observe them discourse and reason pretty
well, and have very clear conceptions of several other things, before
they can tell twenty. And some, through the default of their memories,
who cannot retain the several combinations of numbers, with their
names, annexed in their distinct orders, and the dependence of so long
a train of numeral progressions, and their relation one to another, are
not able all their lifetime to reckon, or regularly go over any
moderate series of numbers. For he that will count twenty, or have any
idea of that number, must know that nineteen went before, with the
distinct name or sign of every one of them, as they stand marked in
their order; for wherever this fails, a gap is made, the chain breaks,
and the progress in numbering can go no further. So that to reckon
right, it is required, (1) That the mind distinguish carefully two
ideas, which are different one from another only by the addition or
subtraction of ONE unit: (2) That it retain in memory the names or
marks of the several combinations, from an unit to that number; and
that not confusedly, and at random, but in that exact order that the
numbers follow one another. In either of which, if it trips, the whole
business of numbering will be disturbed, and there will remain only the
confused idea of multitude, but the ideas necessary to distinct
numeration will not be attained to.

8. Number measures all Measurables.

This further is observable in number, that it is that which the mind
makes use of in measuring all things that by us are measurable, which
principally are EXPANSION and DURATION; and our idea of infinity, even
when applied to those, seems to be nothing but the infinity of number.
For what else are our ideas of Eternity and Immensity, but the repeated
additions of certain ideas of imagined parts of duration and expansion,
with the infinity of number; in which we can come to no end of
addition? For such an inexhaustible stock, number (of all other our
ideas) most clearly furnishes us with, as is obvious to every one. For
let a man collect into one sum as great a number as he pleases, this
multitude how great soever, lessens not one jot the power of adding to
it, or brings him any nearer the end of the inexhaustible stock of
number; where still there remains as much to be added, as if none were
taken out. And this ENDLESS ADDITION or ADDIBILITY (if any one like the
word better) of numbers, so apparent to the mind, is that, I think,
which gives us the clearest and most distinct idea of infinity: of
which more in the following chapter.




CHAPTER XVII.
OF INFINITY.


1. Infinity, in its original Intention, attributed to Space, Duration,
and Number.

He that would know what kind of idea it is to which we give the name of
INFINITY, cannot do it better than by considering to what infinity is
by the mind more immediately attributed; and then how the mind comes to
frame it.

FINITE and INFINITE seem to me to be looked upon by the mind as the
MODES OF QUANTITY, and to be attributed primarily in their first
designation only to those things which have parts, and are capable of
increase or diminution by the addition or subtraction of any the least
part: and such are the ideas of space, duration, and number, which we
have considered in the foregoing chapters. It is true, that we cannot
but be assured, that the great God, of whom and from whom are all
things, is incomprehensibly infinite: but yet, when we apply to that
first and supreme Being our idea of infinite, in our weak and narrow
thoughts, we do it primarily in respect to his duration and ubiquity;
and, I think, more figuratively to his power, wisdom, and goodness, and
other attributes which are properly inexhaustible and incomprehensible,
&c. For, when we call THEM infinite, we have no other idea of this
infinity but what carries with it some reflection on, and imitation of,
that number or extent of the acts or objects of God’s power, wisdom,
and goodness, which can never be supposed so great, or so many, which
these attributes will not always surmount and exceed, let us multiply
them in our thoughts as far as we can, with all the infinity of endless
number. I do not pretend to say how these attributes are in God, who is
infinitely beyond the reach of our narrow capacities: they do, without
doubt, contain in them all possible perfection: but this, I say, is our
way of conceiving them, and these our ideas of their infinity.

2. The Idea of Finite easily got.

Finite then, and infinite, being by the mind looked on as MODIFICATIONS
of expansion and duration, the next thing to be considered, is,—HOW THE
MIND COMES BY THEM. As for the idea of finite, there is no great
difficulty. The obvious portions of extension that affect our senses,
carry with them into the mind the idea of finite: and the ordinary
periods of succession, whereby we measure time and duration, as hours,
days, and years, are bounded lengths. The difficulty is, how we come by
those BOUNDLESS IDEAS of eternity and immensity; since the objects we
converse with come so much short of any approach or proportion to that
largeness.

3. How we come by the Idea of Infinity.

Every one that has any idea of any stated lengths of space, as a foot,
finds that he can repeat that idea; and joining it to the former, make
the idea of two feet; and by the addition of a third, three feet; and
so on, without ever coming to an end of his additions, whether of the
same idea of a foot, or, if he pleases, of doubling it, or any other
idea he has of any length, as a mile, or diameter of the earth, or of
the orbis magnus: for whichever of these he takes, and how often soever
he doubles, or any otherwise multiplies it, he finds, that, after he
has continued his doubling in his thoughts, and enlarged his idea as
much as he pleases, he has no more reason to stop, nor is one jot
nearer the end of such addition, than he was at first setting out: the
power of enlarging his idea of space by further additions remaining
still the same, he hence takes the idea of infinite space.

4. Our Idea of Space boundless.

This, I think, is the way whereby the mind gets the IDEA of infinite
space. It is a quite different consideration, to examine whether the
mind has the idea of such a boundless space ACTUALLY EXISTING; since
our ideas are not always proofs of the existence of things: but yet,
since this comes here in our way, I suppose I may say, that we are APT
TO THINK that space in itself is actually boundless, to which
imagination the idea of space or expansion of itself naturally leads
us. For, it being considered by us, either as the extension of body, or
as existing by itself, without any solid matter taking it up, (for of
such a void space we have not only the idea, but I have proved, as I
think, from the motion of body, its necessary existence,) it is
impossible the mind should be ever able to find or suppose any end of
it, or be stopped anywhere in its progress in this space, how far
soever it extends its thoughts. Any bounds made with body, even
adamantine walls, are so far from putting a stop to the mind in its
further progress in space and extension that it rather facilitates and
enlarges it. For so far as that body reaches, so far no one can doubt
of extension; and when we are come to the utmost extremity of body,
what is there that can there put a stop, and satisfy the mind that it
is at the end of space, when it perceives that it is not; nay, when it
is satisfied that body itself can move into it? For, if it be necessary
for the motion of body, that there should be an empty space, though
ever so little, here amongst bodies; and if it be possible for body to
move in or through that empty space;—nay, it is impossible for any
particle of matter to move but into an empty space; the same
possibility of a body’s moving into a void space, beyond the utmost
bounds of body, as well as into a void space interspersed amongst
bodies, will always remain clear and evident: the idea of empty pure
space, whether within or beyond the confines of all bodies, being
exactly the same, differing not in nature, though in bulk; and there
being nothing to hinder body from moving into it. So that wherever the
mind places itself by any thought, either amongst, or remote from all
bodies, it can, in this uniform idea of space, nowhere find any bounds,
any end; and so must necessarily conclude it, by the very nature and
idea of each part of it, to be actually infinite.

5. And so of Duration.

As, by the power we find in ourselves of repeating, as often as we
will, any idea of space, we get the idea of IMMENSITY; so, by being
able to repeat the idea of any length of duration we have in our minds,
with all the endless addition of number, we come by the idea of
ETERNITY. For we find in ourselves, we can no more come to an end of
such repeated ideas than we can come to the end of number; which every
one perceives he cannot. But here again it is another question, quite
different from our having an IDEA of eternity, to know whether there
were ANY REAL BEING, whose duration has been eternal. And as to this, I
say, he that considers something now existing, must necessarily come to
Something eternal. But having spoke of this in another place, I shall
say here no more of it, but proceed on to some other considerations of
our idea of infinity.

6. Why other Ideas are not capable of Infinity.

If it be so, that our idea of infinity be got from the power we observe
in ourselves of repeating, without end, our own ideas, it may be
demanded,—Why we do not attribute infinity to other ideas, as well as
those of space and duration; since they may be as easily, and as often,
repeated in our minds as the other: and yet nobody ever thinks of
infinite sweetness or infinite whiteness, though he can repeat the idea
of sweet or white, as frequently as those of a yard or a day? To which
I answer,—All the ideas that are considered as having parts, and are
capable of increase by the addition of an equal or less parts, afford
us, by their repetition, the idea of infinity; because, with this
endless repetition, there is continued an enlargement of which there
CAN be no end. But for other ideas it is not so. For to the largest
idea of extension or duration that I at present have, the addition of
any the least part makes an increase; but to the perfectest idea I have
of the whitest whiteness, if I add another of a less equal whiteness,
(and of a whiter than I have, I cannot add the idea,) it makes no
increase, and enlarges not my idea at all; and therefore the different
ideas of whiteness, &c. are called degrees. For those ideas that
consist of part are capable of being augmented by every addition of the
least part; but if you take the idea of white, which one parcel of snow
yielded yesterday to our sight, and another idea of white from another
parcel of snow you see to-day, and put them together in your mind, they
embody, as it were, all run into one, and the idea of whiteness is not
at all increased and if we add a less degree of whiteness to a greater,
we are so far from increasing, that we diminish it. Those ideas that
consist not of parts cannot be augmented to what proportion men please,
or be stretched beyond what they have received by their senses; but
space, duration, and number, being capable of increase by repetition,
leave in the mind an idea of endless room for more; nor can we conceive
anywhere a stop to a further addition or progression: and so those
ideas ALONE lead our minds towards the thought of infinity.

7. Difference between infinity of Space, and Space infinite.

Though our idea of infinity arise from the contemplation of quantity,
and the endless increase the mind is able to make in quantity, by the
repeated additions of what portions thereof it pleases; yet I guess we
cause great confusion in our thoughts, when we join infinity to any
supposed idea of quantity the mind can be thought to have, and so
discourse or reason about an infinite quantity, as an infinite space,
or an infinite duration. For, as our idea of infinity being, as I
think, AN ENDLESS GROWING IDEA, but the idea of any quantity the mind
has, being at that time TERMINATED in that idea, (for be it as great as
it will, it can be no greater than it is,)—to join infinity to it, is
to adjust a standing measure to a growing bulk; and therefore I think
it is not an insignificant subtilty, if I say, that we are carefully to
distinguish between the idea of the infinity of space, and the idea of
a space infinite. The first is nothing but a supposed endless
progression of the mind, over what repeated ideas of space it pleases;
but to have actually in the mind the idea of a space infinite, is to
suppose the mind already passed over, and actually to have a view of
ALL those repeated ideas of space which an ENDLESS repetition can never
totally represent to it; which carries in it a plain contradiction.

8. We have no Idea of infinite Space.

This, perhaps, will be a little plainer, if we consider it in numbers.
The infinity of numbers, to the end of whose addition every one
perceives there is no approach, easily appears to any one that reflects
on it. But, how clear soever this idea of the infinity of number be,
there is nothing yet more evident than the absurdity of the actual idea
of an infinite number. Whatsoever POSITIVE ideas we have in our minds
of any space, duration, or number, let them be ever so great, they are
still finite; but when we suppose an inexhaustible remainder, from
which we remove all bounds, and wherein we allow the mind an endless
progression of thought, without ever completing the idea, there we have
our idea of infinity: which, though it seems to be pretty clear when we
consider nothing else in it but the negation of an end, yet, when we
would frame in our minds the idea of an infinite space or duration,
that idea is very obscure and confused, because it is made up of two
parts, very different, if not inconsistent. For, let a man frame in his
mind an idea of any space or number, as great as he will; it is plain
the mind RESTS AND TERMINATES in that idea, which is contrary to the
idea of infinity, which CONSISTS IN A SUPPOSED ENDLESS PROGRESSION. And
therefore I think it is that we are so easily confounded, when we come
to argue and reason about infinite space or duration, &c. Because the
parts of such an idea not being perceived to be, as they are,
inconsistent, the one side or other always perplexes, whatever
consequences we draw from the other; as an idea of motion not passing
on would perplex any one who should argue from such an idea, which is
not better than an idea of motion at rest. And such another seems to me
to be the idea of a space, or (which is the same thing) a number
infinite, i. e. of a space or number which the mind actually has, and
so views and terminates in; and of a space or number, which, in a
constant and endless enlarging and progression, it can in thought never
attain to. For, how large soever an idea of space I have in my mind, it
is no larger than it is that instant that I have it, though I be
capable the next instant to double it, and so on in infinitum; for that
alone is infinite which has no bounds; and that the idea of infinity,
in which our thoughts can find none.

9. Number affords us the clearest Idea of Infinity.

But of all other ideas, it is number, as I have said, which I think
furnishes us with the clearest and most distinct idea of infinity we
are capable of. For, even in space and duration, when the mind pursues
the idea of infinity, it there makes use of the ideas and repetitions
of numbers, as of millions and millions of miles, or years, which are
so many distinct ideas,—kept best by number from running into a
confused heap, wherein the mind loses itself; and when it has added
together as many millions, &c., as it pleases, of known lengths of
space or duration, the clearest idea it can get of infinity, is the
confused incomprehensible remainder of endless addible numbers, which
affords no prospect of stop or boundary.

10. Our different Conceptions of the Infinity of Number contrasted with
those of Duration and Expansion.

It will, perhaps, give us a little further light into the idea we have
of infinity, and discover to us, that it is NOTHING BUT THE INFINITY OF
NUMBER APPLIED TO DETERMINATE PARTS, OF WHICH WE HAVE IN OUR MINDS THE
DISTINCT IDEAS, if we consider that number is not generally thought by
us infinite, whereas duration and extension are apt to be so; which
arises from hence,—that in number we are at one end, as it were: for
there being in number nothing LESS than an unit, we there stop, and are
at an end; but in addition, or increase of number, we can set no
bounds: and so it is like a line, whereof one end terminating with us,
the other is extended still forwards, beyond all that we can conceive.
But in space and duration it is otherwise. For in duration we consider
it as if this line of number were extended BOTH ways—to an
unconceivable, undeterminate, and infinite length; which is evident to
anyone that will but reflect on what consideration he hath of Eternity;
which, I suppose, will find to be nothing else but the turning this
infinity of number both ways, a parte ante and a parte post, as they
speak. For, when we would consider eternity, a parte ante, what do we
but, beginning from ourselves and the present time we are in, repeat in
our minds ideas of years, or ages, or any other assignable portion of
duration past, with a prospect of proceeding in such addition with all
the infinity of number: and when we would consider eternity, a parte
post, we just after the same rate begin from ourselves, and reckon by
multiplied periods yet to come, still extending that line of number as
before. And these two being put together, are that infinite duration we
call ETERNITY which, as we turn our view either way, forwards or
backward appears infinite, because we still turn that way the infinite
end of number, i.e. the power still of adding more.

11. How we conceive the Infinity of Space.

The same happens also in space, wherein, conceiving ourselves to be, as
it were, in the centre, we do on all sides pursue those indeterminable
lines of number; and reckoning any way from ourselves, a yard, mile,
diameter of the earth or orbis magnus,—by the infinity of number, we
add others to them, as often as we will. And having no more reason to
set bounds to those repeated ideas than we have to set bounds to
number, we have that indeterminable idea of immensity.

12. Infinite Divisibility.

And since in any bulk of matter our thoughts can never arrive at the
utmost divisibility, therefore there is an apparent infinity to us also
in that, which has the infinity also of number; but with this
difference,—that, in the former considerations of the infinity of space
and duration, we only use addition of numbers; whereas this is like the
division of an unit into its fractions, wherein the mind also can
proceed in infinitum, as well as in the former additions; it being
indeed but the addition still of new numbers: though in the addition of
the one, we can have no more the POSITIVE idea of a space infinitely
great, than, in the division of the other, we can have the positive
idea of a body infinitely little;—our idea of infinity being, as I may
say, a growing or fugitive idea, still in a boundless progression, that
can stop nowhere.

13. No positive Idea of Infinity.

Though it be hard, I think, to find anyone so absurd as to say he has
the POSITIVE idea of an actual infinite number;—the infinity whereof
lies only in a power still of adding any combination of units to any
former number, and that as long and as much as one will; the like also
being in the infinity of space and duration, which power leaves always
to the mind room for endless additions;—yet there be those who imagine
they have positive ideas of infinite duration and space. It would, I
think, be enough to destroy any such positive idea of infinite, to ask
him that has it,—whether he could add to it or no; which would easily
show the mistake of such a positive idea. We can, I think, have no
positive idea of any space or duration which is not made up of, and
commensurate to, repeated numbers of feet or yards, or days and years;
which are the common measures, whereof we have the ideas in our minds,
and whereby we judge of the greatness of this sort of quantities. And
therefore, since an infinite idea of space or duration must needs be
made up of infinite parts, it can have no other infinity than that of
number CAPABLE still of further addition; but not an actual positive
idea of a number infinite. For, I think it is evident, that the
addition of finite things together (as are all lengths whereof we have
the positive ideas) can never otherwise produce the idea of infinite
than as number does; which consisting of additions of finite units one
to another, suggests the idea of infinite, only by a power we find we
have of still increasing the sum, and adding more of the same kind;
without coming one jot nearer the end of such progression.

14. How we cannot have a positive idea of infinity in Quantity.

They who would prove their idea of infinite to be positive, seem to me
to do it by a pleasant argument, taken from the negation of an end;
which being negative, the negation on it is positive. He that considers
that the end is, in body, but the extremity or superficies of that
body, will not perhaps be forward to grant that the end is a bare
negative: and he that perceives the end of his pen is black or white,
will be apt to think that the end is something more than a pure
negation. Nor is it, when applied to duration, the bare negation of
existence, but more properly the last moment of it. But as they will
have the end to be nothing but the bare negation of existence, I am
sure they cannot deny but the beginning of the first instant of being,
and is not by any body conceived to be a bare negation; and therefore,
by their own argument, the idea of eternal, A PARTE ANTE, or of a
duration without a beginning, is but a negative idea.

15. What is positive, what negative, in our Idea of infinite.

The idea of infinite has, I confess, something of positive in all those
things we apply to it. When we would think of infinite space or
duration, we at first step usually make some very large idea, as
perhaps of millions of ages, or miles, which possibly we double and
multiply several times. All that we thus amass together in our thoughts
is positive, and the assemblage of a great number of positive ideas of
space or duration. But what still remains beyond this we have no more a
positive distinct notion of than a mariner has of the depth of the sea;
where, having let down a large portion of his sounding-line, he reaches
no bottom. Whereby he knows the depth to be so many fathoms, and more;
but how much the more is, he hath no distinct notion at all: and could
he always supply new line, and find the plummet always sink, without
ever stopping, he would be something in the posture of the mind
reaching after a complete and positive idea of infinity. In which case,
let this line be ten, or ten thousand fathoms long, it equally
discovers what is beyond it, and gives only this confused and
comparative idea, that this is not all, but one may yet go farther. So
much as the mind comprehends of any space, it has a positive idea of:
but in endeavouring to make it infinite,—it being always enlarging,
always advancing,—the idea is still imperfect and incomplete. So much
space as the mind takes a view of in its contemplation of greatness, is
a clear picture, and positive in the understanding: but infinite is
still greater. 1. Then the idea of SO MUCH is positive and clear. 2.
The idea of GREATER is also clear; but it is but a comparative idea,
the idea of SO MUCH GREATER AS CANNOT BE COMPREHENDED. 3. And this is
plainly negative: not positive. For he has no positive clear idea of
the largeness of any extension, (which is that sought for in the idea
of infinite), that has not a comprehensive idea of the dimensions of
it: and such, nobody, I think, pretends to in what is infinite. For to
say a man has a positive clear idea of any quantity, without knowing
how great it is, is as reasonable as to say, he has the positive clear
idea of the number of the sands on the sea-shore, who knows not how
many there be, but only that they are more than twenty. For just such a
perfect and positive idea has he of an infinite space or duration, who
says it is LARGER THAN the extent or duration of ten, one hundred, one
thousand, or any other number of miles, or years, whereof he has or can
have a positive idea; which is all the idea, I think, we have of
infinite. So that what lies beyond our positive idea TOWARDS infinity,
lies in obscurity, and has the indeterminate confusion of a negative
idea, wherein I know I neither do nor can comprehend all I would, it
being too large for a finite and narrow capacity. And that cannot but
be very far from a positive complete idea, wherein the greatest part of
what I would comprehend is left out, under the undeterminate intimation
of being still greater. For to say, that, having in any quantity
measured so much, or gone so far, you are not yet at the end, is only
to say that that quantity is greater. So that the negation of an end in
any quantity is, in other words, only to say that it is bigger; and a
total negation of an end is but carrying this bigger still with you, in
all the progressions your thoughts shall make in quantity; and adding
this IDEA OF STILL GREATER to ALL the ideas you have, or can be
supposed to have, of quantity. Now, whether such an idea as that be
positive, I leave any one to consider.

16. We have no positive Idea of an infinite Duration.

I ask those who say they have a positive idea of eternity, whether
their idea of duration includes in it succession, or not? If it does
not, they ought to show the difference of their notion of duration,
when applied to an eternal Being, and to a finite; since, perhaps,
there may be others as well as I, who will own to them their weakness
of understanding in this point, and acknowledge that the notion they
have of duration forces them to conceive, that whatever has duration,
is of a longer continuance to-day than it was yesterday. If, to avoid
succession in external existence, they return to the punctum stans of
the schools, I suppose they will thereby very little mend the matter,
or help us to a more clear and positive idea of infinite duration;
there being nothing more inconceivable to me than duration without
succession. Besides, that punctum stans, if it signify anything, being
not quantum, finite or infinite cannot belong to it. But, if our weak
apprehensions cannot separate succession from any duration whatsoever,
our idea of eternity can be nothing but of INFINITE SUCCESSION OF
MOMENTS OF DURATION WHEREIN ANYTHING DOES EXIST; and whether any one
has, or can have, a positive idea of an actual infinite number, I leave
him to consider, till his infinite number be so great that he himself
can add no more to it; and as long as he can increase it, I doubt he
himself will think the idea he hath of it a little too scanty for
positive infinity.

17. No complete Idea of Eternal Being.

I think it unavoidable for every considering, rational creature, that
will but examine his own or any other existence, to have the notion of
an eternal, wise Being, who had no beginning: and such an idea of
infinite duration I am sure I have. But this negation of a beginning,
being but the negation of a positive thing, scarce gives me a positive
idea of infinity; which, whenever I endeavour to extend my thoughts to,
I confess myself at a loss, and I find I cannot attain any clear
comprehension of it.

18. No positive Idea of infinite Space.

He that thinks he has a positive idea of infinite space, will, when he
considers it, find that he can no more have a positive idea of the
greatest, than he has of the least space. For in this latter, which
seems the easier of the two, and more within our comprehension, we are
capable only of a comparative idea of smallness, which will always be
less than any one whereof we have the positive idea. All our POSITIVE
ideas of any quantity, whether great or little, have always bounds,
though our COMPARATIVE idea, whereby we can always add to the one, and
take from the other, hath no bounds. For that which remains, either
great or little, not being comprehended in that positive idea which we
have, lies in obscurity; and we have no other idea of it, but of the
power of enlarging the one and diminishing the other, WITHOUT CEASING.
A pestle and mortar will as soon bring any particle of matter to
indivisibility, as the acutest thought of a mathematician; and a
surveyor may as soon with his chain measure out infinite space, as a
philosopher by the quickest flight of mind reach it or by thinking
comprehend it; which is to have a positive idea of it. He that thinks
on a cube of an inch diameter, has a clear and positive idea of it in
his mind, and so can frame one of 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, and so on, till he has
the idea in his thoughts of something very little; but yet reaches not
the idea of that incomprehensible littleness which division can
produce. What remains of smallness is as far from his thoughts as when
he first began; and therefore he never comes at all to have a clear and
positive idea of that smallness which is consequent to infinite
divisibility.

19. What is positive, what negative, in our Idea of Infinite.

Every one that looks towards infinity does, as I have said, at first
glance make some very large idea of that which he applies it to, let it
be space or duration; and possibly he wearies his thoughts, by
multiplying in his mind that first large idea: but yet by that he comes
no nearer to the having a positive clear idea of what remains to make
up a positive infinite, than the country fellow had of the water which
was yet to come, and pass the channel of the river where he stood:

‘Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, at ille
Labitur, et labetur in omne volubilis ævum.’


20. Some think they have a positive Idea of Eternity, and not of
infinite Space.

There are some I have met that put so much difference between infinite
duration and infinite space, that they persuade themselves that they
have a positive idea of eternity, but that they have not, nor can have
any idea of infinite space. The reason of which mistake I suppose to be
this—that finding, by a due contemplation of causes and effects, that
it is necessary to admit some Eternal Being, and so to consider the
real existence of that Being as taken up and commensurate to their idea
of eternity; but, on the other side, not finding it necessary, but, on
the contrary, apparently absurd, that body should be infinite, they
forwardly conclude that they can have no idea of infinite space,
because they can have no idea of infinite matter. Which consequence, I
conceive, is very ill collected, because the existence of matter is no
ways necessary to the existence of space, no more than the existence of
motion, or the sun, is necessary to duration, though duration uses to
be measured by it. And I doubt not but that a man may have the idea of
ten thousand miles square, without any body so big, as well as the idea
of ten thousand years, without any body so old. It seems as easy to me
to have the idea of space empty of body, as to think of the capacity of
a bushel without corn, or the hollow of a nut-shell without a kernel in
it: it being no more necessary that there should be existing a solid
body, infinitely extended, because we have an idea of the infinity of
space, than it is necessary that the world should be eternal, because
we have an idea of infinite duration. And why should we think our idea
of infinite space requires the real existence of matter to support it,
when we find that we have as clear an idea of an infinite duration to
come, as we have of infinite duration past? Though I suppose nobody
thinks it conceivable that anything does or has existed in that future
duration. Nor is it possible to join our idea of future duration with
present or past existence, any more than it is possible to make the
ideas of yesterday, to-day, and to-morrow to be the same; or bring ages
past and future together, and make them contemporary. But if these men
are of the mind, that they have clearer ideas of infinite duration than
of infinite space, because it is past doubt that God has existed from
all eternity, but there is no real matter co-extended with infinite
space; yet those philosophers who are of opinion that infinite space is
possessed by God’s infinite omnipresence, as well as infinite duration
by his eternal existence, must be allowed to have as clear an idea of
infinite space as of infinite duration; though neither of them, I
think, has any positive idea of infinity in either case. For whatsoever
positive ideas a man has in his mind of any quantity, he can repeat it,
and add it to the former, as easy as he can add together the ideas of
two days, or two paces, which are positive ideas of lengths he has in
his mind, and so on as long as he pleases: whereby, if a man had a
positive idea of infinite, either duration or space, he could add two
infinites together; nay, make one infinite infinitely bigger than
another—absurdities too gross to be confuted.

21. Supposed positive Ideas of Infinity, cause of Mistakes.

But yet if after all this, there be men who persuade themselves that
they have clear positive comprehensive ideas of infinity, it is fit
they enjoy their privilege: and I should be very glad (with some others
that I know, who acknowledge they have none such) to be better informed
by their communication. For I have been hitherto apt to think that the
great and inextricable difficulties which perpetually involve all
discourses concerning infinity,—whether of space, duration, or
divisibility, have been the certain marks of a defect in our ideas of
infinity, and the disproportion the nature thereof has to the
comprehension of our narrow capacities. For, whilst men talk and
dispute of infinite space or duration, as if they had as complete and
positive ideas of them as they have of the names they use for them, or
as they have of a yard, or an hour, or any other determinate quantity;
it is no wonder if the incomprehensible nature of the thing they
discourse of, or reason about, leads them into perplexities and
contradictions, and their minds be overlaid by an object too large and
mighty to be surveyed and managed by them.

22. All these are modes of Ideas got from Sensation and Reflection.

If I have dwelt pretty long on the consideration of duration, space,
and number, and what arises from the contemplation of them,—Infinity,
it is possibly no more than the matter requires; there being few simple
ideas whose MODES give more exercise to the thoughts of men than those
do. I pretend not to treat of them in their full latitude. It suffices
to my design to show how the mind receives them, such as they are, from
sensation and reflection; and how even the idea we have of infinity,
how remote soever it may seem to be from any object of sense, or
operation of our mind, has, nevertheless, as all our other ideas, its
original there. Some mathematicians perhaps, of advanced speculations,
may have other ways to introduce into their minds ideas of infinity.
But this hinders not but that they themselves, as well as all other
men, got the first ideas which they had of infinity from sensation and
reflection, in the method we have here set down.




CHAPTER XVIII.
OTHER SIMPLE MODES.


1. Other simple Modes of simple Ideas of sensation.

Though I have, in the foregoing chapters, shown how from simple ideas
taken in by sensation, the mind comes to extend itself even to
infinity; which, however it may of all others seem most remote from any
sensible perception, yet at last hath nothing in it but what is made
out of simple ideas: received into the mind by the senses, and
afterwards there put together, by the faculty the mind has to repeat
its own ideas; —Though, I say, these might be instances enough of
simple modes of the simple ideas of sensation, and suffice to show how
the mind comes by them, yet I shall, for method’s sake, though briefly,
give an account of some few more, and then proceed to more complex
ideas.

2. Simple modes of motion.

To slide, roll, tumble, walk, creep, run, dance, leap, skip, and
abundance of others that might be named, are words which are no sooner
heard but every one who understands English has presently in his mind
distinct ideas, which are all but the different modifications of
motion. Modes of motion answer those of extension; swift and slow are
two different ideas of motion, the measures whereof are made of the
distances of time and space put together; so they are complex ideas,
comprehending time and space with motion.

3. Modes of Sounds.

The like variety have we in sounds. Every articulate word is a
different modification of sound; by which we see that, from the sense
of hearing, by such modifications, the mind may be furnished with
distinct ideas, to almost an infinite number. Sounds also, besides the
distinct cries of birds and beasts, are modified by diversity of notes
of different length put together, which make that complex idea called a
tune, which a musician may have in his mind when he hears or makes no
sound at all, by reflecting on the ideas of those sounds, so put
together silently in his own fancy.

4. Modes of Colours.

Those of colours are also very various: some we take notice of as the
different degrees, or as they were termed shades, of the same colour.
But since we very seldom make assemblages of colours, either for use or
delight, but figure is taken in also, and has its part in it, as in
painting, weaving, needleworks, &c.;—those which are taken notice of do
most commonly belong to MIXED MODES, as being made up of ideas of
divers kinds, viz. figure and colour, such as beauty, rainbow, &c.

5. Modes of Tastes.

All compounded tastes and smells are also modes, made up of the simple
ideas of those senses. But they, being such as generally we have no
names for, are less taken notice of, and cannot be set down in writing;
and therefore must be left without enumeration to the thoughts and
experience of my reader.

6. Some simple Modes have no Names.

In general it may be observed, that those simple modes which are
considered but as different DEGREES of the same simple idea, though
they are in themselves many of them very distinct ideas, yet have
ordinarily no distinct names, nor are much taken notice of, as distinct
ideas, where the difference is but very small between them. Whether men
have neglected these modes, and given no names to them, as wanting
measures nicely to distinguish them; or because, when they were so
distinguished, that knowledge would not be of general or necessary use,
I leave it to the thoughts of others. It is sufficient to my purpose to
show, that all our simple ideas come to our minds only by sensation and
reflection; and that when the mood has them, it can variously repeat
and compound them, and so make new complex ideas. But, though white,
red, or sweet, &c. have not been modified, or made into complex ideas,
by several combinations, so as to be named, and thereby ranked into
species; yet some others of the simple ideas, viz. those of unity,
duration, and motion, &c., above instanced in, as also power and
thinking, have been thus modified to a great variety of complex ideas,
with names belonging to them.

7. Why some Modes have, and others have not, Names.

The reason whereof, I suppose, has been this,—That the great
concernment of men being with men one amongst another, the knowledge of
men, and their actions, and the signifying of them to one another, was
most necessary; and therefore they made ideas of ACTIONS very nicely
modified, and gave those complex ideas names, that they might the more
easily record and discourse of those things they were daily conversant
in, without long ambages and circumlocutions; and that the things they
were continually to give and receive information about might be the
easier and quicker understood. That this is so, and that men in framing
different complex ideas, and giving them names, have been much governed
by the end of speech in general, (which is a very short and expedite
way of conveying their thoughts one to another), is evident in the
names which in several arts have been found out, and applied to several
complex ideas of modified actions, belonging to their several trades,
for dispatch sake, in their direction or discourses about them. Which
ideas are not generally framed in the minds of men not conversant about
these operations. And thence the words that stand for them, by the
greatest part of men of the same language, are not understood: v. g.
COLTSHIRE, DRILLING, FILTRATION, COHOBATION, are words standing for
certain complex ideas, which being seldom in the minds of any but those
few whose particular employments do at every turn suggest them to their
thoughts, those names of them are not generally understood but by
smiths and chymists; who, having framed the complex ideas which these
words stand for, and having given names to them, or received them from
others, upon hearing of these names in communication, readily conceive
those ideas in their minds;-as by COHOBATION all the simple ideas of
distilling, and the pouring the liquor distilled from anything back
upon the remaining matter, and distilling it again. Thus we see that
there are great varieties of simple ideas, as of tastes and smells,
which have no names; and of modes many more; which either not having
been generally enough observed, or else not being of any great use to
be taken notice of in the affairs and converse of men, they have not
had names given to them, and so pass not for species. This we shall
have occasion hereafter to consider more at large, when we come to
speak of WORDS.




CHAPTER XIX.
OF THE MODES OF THINKING.


1. Sensation, Remembrance, Contemplation, &c., modes of thinking.

When the mind turns its view inwards upon itself, and contemplates its
own actions, THINKING is the first that occurs. In it the mind observes
a great variety of modifications, and from thence receives distinct
ideas. Thus the perception or thought which actually accompanies, and
is annexed to, any impression on the body, made by an external object,
being distinct from all other modifications of thinking, furnishes the
mind with a distinct idea, which we call SENSATION;—which is, as it
were, the actual entrance of any idea into the understanding by the
senses. The same idea, when it again recurs without the operation of
the like object on the external sensory, is REMEMBRANCE: if it be
sought after by the mind, and with pain and endeavour found, and
brought again in view, it is RECOLLECTION: if it be held there long
under attentive consideration, it is CONTEMPLATION: when ideas float in
our mind without any reflection or regard of the understanding, it is
that which the French call REVERIE; our language has scarce a name for
it: when the ideas that offer themselves (for, as I have observed in
another place, whilst we are awake, there will always be a train of
ideas succeeding one another in our minds) are taken notice of, and, as
it were, registered in the memory, it is ATTENTION: when the mind with
great earnestness, and of choice, fixes its view on any idea, considers
it on all sides, and will not be called off by the ordinary
solicitation of other ideas, it is that we call INTENTION or STUDY:
sleep, without dreaming, is rest from all these: and DREAMING itself is
the having of ideas (whilst the outward senses are stopped, so that
they receive not outward objects with their usual quickness) in the
mind, not suggested by any external objects, or known occasion; nor
under any choice or conduct of the understanding at all: and whether
that which we call ECSTASY be not dreaming with the eyes open, I leave
to be examined.

2. Other modes of thinking.

These are some few instances of those various modes of thinking, which
the mind may observe in itself, and so have as distinct ideas of as it
hath of white and red, a square or a circle. I do not pretend to
enumerate them all, nor to treat at large of this set of ideas, which
are got from reflection: that would be to make a volume. It suffices to
my present purpose to have shown here, by some few examples, of what
sort these ideas are, and how the mind comes by them; especially since
I shall have occasion hereafter to treat more at large of REASONING,
JUDGING, VOLITION, and KNOWLEDGE, which are some of the most
considerable operations of the mind, and modes of thinking.

3. The various degrees of Attention in thinking.

But perhaps it may not be an unpardonable digression, nor wholly
impertinent to our present design, if we reflect here upon the
different state of the mind in thinking, which those instances of
attention, reverie, and dreaming, &c., before mentioned, naturally
enough suggest. That there are ideas, some or other, always present in
the mind of a waking man, every one’s experience convinces him; though
the mind employs itself about them with several degrees of attention.
Sometimes the mind fixes itself with so much earnestness on the
contemplation of some objects, that it turns their ideas on all sides;
marks their relations and circumstances; and views every part so nicely
and with such intention, that it shuts out all other thoughts, and
takes no notice of the ordinary impressions made then on the senses,
which at another season would produce very sensible perceptions: at
other times it barely observes the train of ideas that succeed in the
understanding, without directing and pursuing any of them: and at other
times it lets them pass almost quite unregarded, as faint shadows that
make no impression.

4. Hence it is probable that Thinking is the Action, not the Essence of
the Soul.

This difference of intention, and remission of the mind in thinking,
with a great variety of degrees between earnest study and very near
minding nothing at all, every one, I think, has experimented in
himself. Trace it a little further, and you find the mind in sleep
retired as it were from the senses, and out of the reach of those
motions made on the organs of sense, which at other times produce very
vivid and sensible ideas. I need not, for this, instance in those who
sleep out whole stormy nights, without hearing the thunder, or seeing
the lightning, or feeling the shaking of the house, which are sensible
enough to those who are waking. But in this retirement of the mind from
the senses, it often retains a yet more loose and incoherent manner of
thinking, which we call dreaming. And, last of all, sound sleep closes
the scene quite, and puts an end to all appearances. This, I think
almost every one has experience of in himself, and his own observation
without difficulty leads him thus far. That which I would further
conclude from hence is, that since the mind can sensibly put on, at
several times, several degrees of thinking, and be sometimes, even in a
waking man, so remiss, as to have thoughts dim and obscure to that
degree that they are very little removed from none at all; and at last,
in the dark retirements of sound sleep, loses the sight perfectly of
all ideas whatsoever: since, I say, this is evidently so in matter of
fact and constant experience, I ask whether it be not probable, that
thinking is the action and not the essence of the soul? Since the
operations of agents will easily admit of intention and remission: but
the essences of things are not conceived capable of any such variation.
But this by the by.




CHAPTER XX.
OF MODES OF PLEASURE AND PAIN.


1. Pleasure and Pain, simple Ideas.

AMONGST the simple ideas which we receive both from sensation and
reflection, PAIN and PLEASURE are two very considerable ones. For as in
the body there is sensation barely in itself, or accompanied with pain
or pleasure, so the thought or perception of the mind is simply so, or
else accompanied also with pleasure or pain, delight or trouble, call
it how you please. These, like other simple ideas, cannot be described,
nor their names defined; the way of knowing them is, as of the simple
ideas of the senses, only by experience. For, to define them by the
presence of good or evil, is no otherwise to make them known to us than
by making us reflect on what we feel in ourselves, upon the several and
various operations of good and evil upon our minds, as they are
differently applied to or considered by us.

2. Good and evil, what.

Things then are good or evil, only in reference to pleasure or pain.
That we call GOOD, which is apt to cause or increase pleasure, or
diminish pain in us; or else to procure or preserve us the possession
of any other good or absence of any evil. And, on the contrary, we name
that EVIL which is apt to produce or increase any pain, or diminish any
pleasure in us: or else to procure us any evil, or deprive us of any
good. By pleasure and pain, I must be understood to mean of body or
mind, as they are commonly distinguished; though in truth they be only
different constitutions of the MIND, sometimes occasioned by disorder
in the body, sometimes by thoughts of the mind.

3. Our passions moved by Good and Evil.

Pleasure and pain and that which causes them,—good and evil, are the
hinges on which our passions turn. And if we reflect on ourselves, and
observe how these, under various considerations, operate in us; what
modifications or tempers of mind, what internal sensations (if I may so
call them) they produce in us we may thence form to ourselves the ideas
of our passions.

4. Love.

Thus any one reflecting upon the thought he has of the delight which
any present or absent thing is apt to produce in him, has the idea we
call LOVE. For when a man declares in autumn when he is eating them, or
in spring when there are none, that he loves grapes, it is no more but
that the taste of grapes delights him: let an alteration of health or
constitution destroy the delight of their taste, and he then can be
said to love grapes no longer.

5. Hatred.

On the contrary, the thought of the pain which anything present or
absent is apt to produce in us, is what we call HATRED. Were it my
business here to inquire any further than into the bare ideas of our
passions, as they depend on different modifications of pleasure and
pain, I should remark that our love and hatred of inanimate insensible
beings is commonly founded on that pleasure and pain which we receive
from their use and application any way to our senses though with their
destruction. But hatred or love, to beings capable of happiness or
misery, is often the uneasiness of delight which we find in ourselves,
arising from their very being or happiness. Thus the being and welfare
of a man’s children or friends, producing constant delight in him, he
is said constantly to love them. But it suffices to note, that our
ideas of love and hatred are but the dispositions of the mind, in
respect of pleasure and pain in general, however caused in us.

6. Desire.

The uneasiness a man finds in himself upon the absence of anything
whose present enjoyment carries the idea of delight with it, is that we
call DESIRE; which is greater or less as that uneasiness is more or
less vehement. Where, by the by, it may perhaps be of some use to
remark, that the chief, if not only spur to human industry and action
is UNEASINESS. For whatsoever good is proposed, if its absence carries
no displeasure or pain with it, if a man be easy and content without
it, there is no desire of it, nor endeavour after it; there is no more
but a bare velleity, the term used to signify the lowest degree of
desire, and that which is next to none at all, when there is so little
uneasiness in the absence of anything, that it carries a man no further
than some faint wishes for it, without any more effectual or vigorous
use of the means to attain it. Desire also is stopped or abated by the
opinion of the impossibility or unattainableness of the good proposed,
as far as the uneasiness is cured or allayed by that consideration.
This might carry our thoughts further, were it seasonable in this
place.

7. Joy.

JOY is a delight of the mind, from the consideration of the present or
assured approaching possession of a good; and we are then possessed of
any good, when we have it so in our power that we can use it when we
please. Thus a man almost starved has joy at the arrival of relief,
even before he has the pleasure of using it: and a father, in whom the
very well-being of his children causes delight, is always, as long as
his children are in such a state, in the possession of that good; for
he needs but to reflect on it, to have that pleasure.

8. Sorrow.

SORROW is uneasiness in the mind, upon the thought of a good lost,
which might have been enjoyed longer; or the sense of a present evil.

9. Hope.

HOPE is that pleasure in the mind, which every one finds in himself,
upon the thought of a probable future enjoyment of a thing which is apt
to delight him.

10. Fear.

FEAR is an uneasiness of the mind, upon the thought of future evil
likely to befall us.

11. Despair.

DESPAIR is the thought of the unattainableness of any good, which works
differently in men’s minds, sometimes producing uneasiness or pain,
sometimes rest and indolency.

12. Anger.

ANGER is uneasiness or discomposure of the mind, upon the receipt of
any injury, with a present purpose of revenge.

13. Envy.

ENVY is an uneasiness of the mind, caused by the consideration of a
good we desire obtained by one we think should not have had it before
us.

14. What Passions all Men have.

These two last, ENVY and ANGER, not being caused by pain and pleasure
simply in themselves, but having in them some mixed considerations of
ourselves and others, are not therefore to be found in all men, because
those other parts, of valuing their merits, or intending revenge, is
wanting in them. But all the rest, terminating purely in pain and
pleasure, are, I think, to be found in all men. For we love, desire,
rejoice, and hope, only in respect of pleasure; we hate, fear, and
grieve, only in respect of pain ultimately. In fine, all these passions
are moved by things, only as they appear to be the causes of pleasure
and pain, or to have pleasure or pain some way or other annexed to
them. Thus we extend our hatred usually to the subject (at least, if a
sensible or voluntary agent) which has produced pain in us; because the
fear it leaves is a constant pain: but we do not so constantly love
what has done us good; because pleasure operates not so strongly on us
as pain, and because we are not so ready to have hope it will do so
again. But this by the by.

15. Pleasure and Pain, what.

By pleasure and pain, delight and uneasiness, I must all along be
understood (as I have above intimated) to mean not only bodily pain and
pleasure, but whatsoever delight or uneasiness is felt by us, whether
arising from any grateful or unacceptable sensation or reflection.

16. Removal or lessening of either.

It is further to be considered, that, in reference to the passions, the
removal or lessening of a pain is considered, and operates, as a
pleasure: and the loss or diminishing of a pleasure, as a pain.

17. Shame.

The passions too have most of them, in most persons, operations on the
body, and cause various changes in it; which not being always sensible,
do not make a necessary part of the idea of each passion. For SHAME,
which is an uneasiness of the mind upon the thought of having done
something which is indecent, or will lessen the valued esteem which
others have for us, has not always blushing accompanying it.

18. These Instances to show how our Ideas of the Passions are got from
Sensation and Reflection.

I would not be mistaken here, as if I meant this as a Discourse of the
Passions; they are many more than those I have here named: and those I
have taken notice of would each of them require a much larger and more
accurate discourse. I have only mentioned these here, as so many
instances of modes of pleasure and pain resulting in our minds from
various considerations of good and evil. I might perhaps have instanced
in other modes of pleasure and pain, more simple than these; as the
pain of hunger and thirst, and the pleasure of eating and drinking to
remove them: the pain of teeth set on edge; the pleasure of music; pain
from captious uninstructive wrangling, and the pleasure of rational
conversation with a friend, or of well-directed study in the search and
discovery of truth. But the passions being of much more concernment to
us, I rather made choice to instance in them, and show how the ideas we
have of them are derived from sensation or reflection.




CHAPTER XXI.
OF POWER.


1. This Idea how got.

The mind being every day informed, by the senses, of the alteration of
those simple ideas it observes in things without; and taking notice how
one comes to an end, and ceases to be, and another begins to exist
which was not before; reflecting also on what passes within itself, and
observing a constant change of its ideas, sometimes by the impression
of outward objects on the senses, and sometimes by the determination of
its own choice; and concluding from what it has so constantly observed
to have been, that the like changes will for the future be made in the
same things, by like agents, and by the like ways,—considers in one
thing the possibility of having any of its simple ideas changed, and in
another the possibility of making that change; and so comes by that
idea which we call POWER. Thus we say, Fire has a power to melt gold,
i. e. to destroy the consistency of its insensible parts, and
consequently its hardness, and make it fluid; and gold has a power to
be melted; that the sun has a power to blanch wax, and wax a power to
be blanched by the sun, whereby the yellowness is destroyed, and
whiteness made to exist in its room. In which, and the like cases, the
power we consider is in reference to the change of perceivable ideas.
For we cannot observe any alteration to be made in, or operation upon
anything, but by the observable change of its sensible ideas; nor
conceive any alteration to be made, but by conceiving a change of some
of its ideas.

2. Power, active and passive.

Power thus considered is two-fold, viz. as able to make, or able to
receive any change. The one may be called ACTIVE, and the other PASSIVE
power. Whether matter be not wholly destitute of active power, as its
author, God, is truly above all passive power; and whether the
intermediate state of created spirits be not that alone which is
capable of both active and passive power, may be worth consideration. I
shall not now enter into that inquiry, my present business being not to
search into the original of power, but how we come by the IDEA of it.
But since active powers make so great a part of our complex ideas of
natural substances, (as we shall see hereafter,) and I mention them as
such, according to common apprehension; yet they being not, perhaps, so
truly ACTIVE powers as our hasty thoughts are apt to represent them, I
judge it not amiss, by this intimation, to direct our minds to the
consideration of God and spirits, for the clearest idea of ACTIVE
power.

3. Power includes Relation.

I confess power includes in it some kind of RELATION (a relation to
action or change,) as indeed which of our ideas of what kind soever,
when attentively considered, does not. For, our ideas of extension,
duration, and number, do they not all contain in them a secret relation
of the parts? Figure and motion have something relative in them much
more visibly. And sensible qualities, as colours and smells, &c. what
are they but the powers of different bodies, in relation to our
perception, &c.? And, if considered in the things themselves, do they
not depend on the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of the parts? All
which include some kind of relation in them. Our idea therefore of
power, I think, may well have a place amongst other SIMPLE IDEAS, and
be considered as one of them; being one of those that make a principal
ingredient in our complex ideas of substances, as we shall hereafter
have occasion to observe.

4. The clearest Idea of active Power had from Spirit.

Of passive power all sensible things abundantly furnish us with
sensible ideas, whose sensible qualities and beings we find to be in
continual flux. And therefore with reason we look on them as liable
still to the same change. Nor have we of ACTIVE power (which is the
more proper signification of the word power) fewer instances. Since
whatever change is observed, the mind must collect a power somewhere
able to make that change, as well as a possibility in the thing itself
to receive it. But yet, if we will consider it attentively, bodies, by
our senses, do not afford us so clear and distinct an idea of active
power, as we have from reflection on the operations of our minds. For
all power relating to action, and there being but two sorts of action
whereof we have an idea, viz. thinking and motion, let us consider
whence we have the clearest ideas of the powers which produce these
actions. (1) Of thinking, body affords us no idea at all; it is only
from reflection that we have that. (2) Neither have we from body any
idea of the beginning of motion. A body at rest affords us no idea of
any active power to move; and when it is set in motion itself, that
motion is rather a passion than an action in it. For, when the ball
obeys the motion of a billiard-stick, it is not any action of the ball,
but bare passion. Also when by impulse it sets another ball in motion
that lay in its way, it only communicates the motion it had received
from another, and loses in itself so much as the other received: which
gives us but a very obscure idea of an ACTIVE power of moving in body,
whilst we observe it only to TRANSFER, but not PRODUCE any motion. For
it is but a very obscure idea of power which reaches not the production
of the action, but the continuation of the passion. For so is motion in
a body impelled by another; the continuation of the alteration made in
it from rest to motion being little more an action, than the
continuation of the alteration of its figure by the same blow is an
action. The idea of the BEGINNING of motion we have only from
reflection on what passes in ourselves; where we find by experience,
that, barely by willing it, barely by a thought of the mind, we can
move the parts of our bodies, which were before at rest. So that it
seems to me, we have, from the observation of the operation of bodies
by our senses, but a very imperfect obscure idea of ACTIVE power; since
they afford us not any idea in themselves of the power to begin any
action, either motion or thought. But if, from the impulse bodies are
observed to make one upon another, any one thinks he has a clear idea
of power, it serves as well to my purpose; sensation being one of those
ways whereby the mind comes by its ideas: only I thought it worth while
to consider here, by the way, whether the mind doth not receive its
idea of active power clearer from reflection on its own operations,
than it doth from any external sensation.

5. Will and Understanding two Powers in Mind or Spirit.

This, at least, I think evident,—That we find in ourselves a power to
begin or forbear, continue or end several actions of our minds, and
motions of our bodies, barely by a thought or preference of the mind
ordering, or as it were commanding, the doing or not doing such or such
a particular action. This power which the mind has thus to order the
consideration of any idea, or the forbearing to consider it; or to
prefer the motion of any part of the body to its rest, and vice versa,
in any particular instance, is that which we call the WILL. The actual
exercise of that power, by directing any particular action, or its
forbearance, is that which we call VOLITION or WILLING. The forbearance
of that action, consequent to such order or command of the mind, is
called VOLUNTARY. And whatsoever action is performed without such a
thought of the mind, is called INVOLUNTARY. The power of perception is
that which we call the UNDERSTANDING. Perception, which we make the act
of the understanding, is of three sorts:—1. The perception of ideas in
our minds. 2. The perception of the signification of signs. 3. The
perception of the connexion or repugnancy, agreement or disagreement,
that there is between any of our ideas. All these are attributed to the
understanding, or perceptive power, though it be the two latter only
that use allows us to say we understand.

6. Faculties not real beings.

These powers of the mind, viz. of perceiving, and of preferring, are
usually called by another name. And the ordinary way of speaking is,
that the understanding and will are two FACULTIES of the mind; a word
proper enough, if it be used, as all words should be, so as not to
breed any confusion in men’s thoughts, by being supposed (as I suspect
it has been) to stand for some real beings in the soul that performed
those actions of understanding and volition. For when we say the WILL
is the commanding and superior faculty of the soul; that it is or is
not free; that it determines the inferior faculties; that it follows
the dictates of the understanding, &c.,—though these and the like
expressions, by those that carefully attend to their own ideas, and
conduct their thoughts more by the evidence of things than the sound of
words, may be understood in a clear and distinct sense—yet I suspect, I
say, that this way of speaking of FACULTIES has misled many into a
confused notion of so many distinct agents in us, which had their
several provinces and authorities, and did command, obey, and perform
several actions, as so many distinct beings; which has been no small
occasion of wrangling, obscurity, and uncertainty, in questions
relating to them.

7. Whence the Ideas of Liberty and Necessity.

Every one, I think, finds in HIMSELF a power to begin or forbear,
continue or put an end to several actions in himself. From the
consideration of the extent of this power of the mind over the actions
of the man, which everyone finds in himself, arise the IDEAS of LIBERTY
and NECESSITY.

8. Liberty, what.

All the actions that we have any idea of reducing themselves, as has
been said, to these two, viz. thinking and motion; so far as a man has
power to think or not to think, to move or not to move, according to
the preference or direction of his own mind, so far is a man FREE.
Wherever any performance or forbearance are not equally in a man’s
power; wherever doing or not doing will not equally FOLLOW upon the
preference of his mind directing it, there he is not free, though
perhaps the action may be voluntary. So that the idea of LIBERTY is,
the idea of a power in any agent to do or forbear any particular
action, according to the determination or thought of the mind, whereby
either of them is preferred to the other: where either of them is not
in the power of the agent to be produced by him according to his
volition, there he is not at liberty; that agent is under NECESSITY. So
that liberty cannot be where there is no thought, no volition, no will;
but there may be thought, there may be will, there may be volition,
where there is no liberty. A little consideration of an obvious
instance or two may make this clear.

9. Supposes Understanding and Will.

A tennis-ball, whether in motion by the stroke of a racket, or lying
still at rest, is not by any one taken to be a free agent. If we
inquire into the reason, we shall find it is because we conceive not a
tennis-ball to think, and consequently not to have any volition, or
PREFERENCE of motion to rest, or vice versa; and therefore has not
liberty, is not a free agent; but all its both motion and rest come
under our idea of necessary, and are so called. Likewise a man falling
into the water, (a bridge breaking under him,) has not herein liberty,
is not a free agent. For though he has volition, though he prefers his
not falling to falling; yet the forbearance of that motion not being in
his power, the stop or cessation of that motion follows not upon his
volition; and therefore therein he is not free. So a man striking
himself, or his friend, by a convulsive motion of his arm, which it is
not in his power, by volition or the direction of his mind, to stop or
forbear, nobody thinks he has in this liberty; every one pities him, as
acting by necessity and constraint.

10. Belongs not to Volition.

Again: suppose a man be carried, whilst fast asleep, into a room where
is a person he longs to see and speak with; and be there locked fast
in, beyond his power to get out: he awakes, and is glad to find himself
in so desirable company, which he stays willingly in, i. e. prefers his
stay to going away. I ask, is not this stay voluntary? I think nobody
will doubt it: and yet, being locked fast in, it is evident he is not
at liberty not to stay, he has not freedom to be gone. So that liberty
is not an idea belonging to volition, or preferring; but to the person
having the power of doing, or forbearing to do, according as the mind
shall choose or direct. Our idea of liberty reaches as far as that
power, and no farther. For wherever restraint comes to check that
power, or compulsion takes away that indifferency of ability to act, or
to forbear acting, there liberty, and our notion of it, presently
ceases.

11. Voluntary opposed to involuntary.

We have instances enough, and often more than enough, in our own
bodies. A man’s heart beats, and the blood circulates, which it is not
in his power by any thought or volition to stop; and therefore in
respect of these motions, where rest depends not on his choice, nor
would follow the determination of his mind, if it should prefer it, he
is not a free agent. Convulsive motions agitate his legs, so that
though he wills it ever so much, he cannot by any power of his mind
stop their motion, (as in that odd disease called chorea sancti viti),
but he is perpetually dancing; he is not at liberty in this action, but
under as much necessity of moving, as a stone that falls, or a
tennis-ball struck with a racket. On the other side, a palsy or the
stocks hinder his legs from obeying the determination of his mind, if
it would thereby transfer his body to another place. In all these there
is want of freedom; though the sitting still, even of a paralytic,
whilst he prefers it to a removal, is truly voluntary. Voluntary, then,
is not opposed to necessary but to involuntary. For a man may prefer
what he can do, to what he cannot do; the state he is in, to its
absence or change; though necessity has made it in itself unalterable.

12. Liberty, what.

As it is in the motions of the body, so it is in the thoughts of our
minds: where any one is such, that we have power to take it up, or lay
it by, according to the preference of the mind, there we are at
liberty. A waking man, being under the necessity of having some ideas
constantly in his mind, is not at liberty to think or not to think; no
more than he is at liberty, whether his body shall touch any other or
no, but whether he will remove his contemplation from one idea to
another is many times in his choice; and then he is, in respect of his
ideas, as much at liberty as he is in respect of bodies he rests on; he
can at pleasure remove himself from one to another. But yet some ideas
to the mind, like some motions to the body, are such as in certain
circumstances it cannot avoid, nor obtain their absence by the utmost
effort it can use. A man on the rack is not at liberty to lay by the
idea of pain, and divert himself with other contemplations: and
sometimes a boisterous passion hurries our thoughts, as a hurricane
does our bodies, without leaving us the liberty of thinking on other
things, which we would rather choose. But as soon as the mind regains
the power to stop or continue, begin or forbear, any of these motions
of the body without, or thoughts within, according as it thinks fit to
prefer either to the other, we then consider the man as a FREE AGENT
again.

13. Wherever thought is wholly wanting, or the power to act or forbear
according to the direction of thought, there necessity takes place.
This, in an agent capable of volition, when the beginning or
continuation of any action is contrary to that preference of his mind,
is called compulsion; when the hindering or stopping any action is
contrary to his volition, it is called restraint. Agents that have no
thought, no volition at all, are in everything NECESSARY AGENTS.

14. If this be so, (as I imagine it is,) I leave it to be considered,
whether it may not help to put an end to that long agitated, and, I
think, unreasonable, because unintelligible question, viz. WHETHER
MAN’S WILL BE FREE OR NO? For if I mistake not, it follows from what I
have said, that the question itself is altogether improper; and it is
as insignificant to ask whether man’s WILL be free, as to ask whether
his sleep be swift, or his virtue square: liberty being as little
applicable to the will, as swiftness of motion is to sleep, or
squareness to virtue. Every one would laugh at the absurdity of such a
question as either of these: because it is obvious that the
modifications of motion belong not to sleep, nor the difference of
figure to virtue; and when any one well considers it, I think he will
as plainly perceive that liberty, which is but a power, belongs only to
Agents, and cannot be an attribute or modification of the will, which
is also but a power.

15. Volition.

Such is the difficulty of explaining and giving clear notions of
internal actions by sounds, that I must here warn my reader, that
ORDERING, DIRECTING, CHOOSING, PREFERRING, &c. which I have made use
of, will not distinctly enough express volition, unless he will reflect
on what he himself does when he wills. For example, preferring, which
seems perhaps best to express the act of volition, does it not
precisely. For though a man would prefer flying to walking, yet who can
say he ever wills it? Volition, it is plain, is an act of the mind
knowingly exerting that dominion it takes itself to have over any part
of the man, by employing it in, or withholding it from, any particular
action. And what is the will, but the faculty to do this? And is that
faculty anything more in effect than a power; the power of the mind to
determine its thought, to the producing, continuing, or stopping any
action, as far as it depends on us? For can it be denied that whatever
agent has a power to think on its own actions, and to prefer their
doing or omission either to other, has that faculty called will? WILL,
then, is nothing but such a power. LIBERTY, on the other side, is the
power a MAN has to do or forbear doing any particular action according
as its doing or forbearance has the actual preference in the mind;
which is the same thing as to say, according as he himself wills it.

16. Powers belonging to Agents.

It is plain then that the will is nothing but one power or ability, and
FREEDOM another power or ability so that, to ask, whether the will has
freedom, is to ask whether one power has another power, one ability
another ability; a question at first sight too grossly absurd to make a
dispute, or need an answer. For, who is it that sees not that powers
belong only to agents, and are attributes only of substances, and not
of powers themselves? So that this way of putting the question (viz.
whether the will be free) is in effect to ask, whether the will be a
substance, an agent, or at least to suppose it, since freedom can
properly be attributed to nothing else. If freedom can with any
propriety of speech be applied to power, it may be attributed to the
power that is in a man to produce, or forbear producing, motion in
parts of his body, by choice or preference; which is that which
denominates him free, and is freedom itself. But if any one should ask,
whether freedom were free, he would be suspected not to understand well
what he said; and he would be thought to deserve Midas’s ears, who,
knowing that rich was a denomination for the possession of riches,
should demand whether riches themselves were rich.

17. How the will instead of the man is called free.

However, the name FACULTY, which men have given to this power called
the will, and whereby they have been led into a way of talking of the
will as acting, may, by an appropriation that disguises its true sense,
serve a little to palliate the absurdity; yet the will, in truth,
signifies nothing but a power or ability to prefer or choose: and when
the will, under the name of a faculty, is considered as it is, barely
as an ability to do something, the absurdity in saying it is free, or
not free, will easily discover itself. For, if it be reasonable to
suppose and talk of faculties as distinct beings that can act, (as we
do, when we say the will orders, and the will is free,) it is fit that
we should make a speaking faculty, and a walking faculty, and a dancing
faculty, by which these actions are produced, which are but several
modes of motion; as well as we make the will and understanding to be
faculties, by which the actions of choosing and perceiving are
produced, which are but several modes of thinking. And we may as
properly say that it is the singing faculty sings, and the dancing
faculty dances, as that the will chooses, or that the understanding
conceives; or, as is usual, that the will directs the understanding, or
the understanding obeys or obeys not the will: it being altogether as
proper and intelligible to say that the power of speaking directs the
power of singing, or the power of singing obeys or disobeys the power
of speaking.

18. This way of talking causes confusion of thought.

This way of talking, nevertheless, has prevailed, and, as I guess,
produced great confusion. For these being all different powers in the
mind, or in the man, to do several actions, he exerts them as he thinks
fit: but the power to do one action is not operated on by the power of
doing another action. For the power of thinking operates not on the
power of choosing, nor the power of choosing on the power of thinking;
no more than the power of dancing operates on the power of singing, or
the power of singing on the power of dancing, as any one who reflects
on it will easily perceive. And yet this is it which we say when we
thus speak, that the will operates on the understanding, or the
understanding on the will.

19. Powers are relations, not agents.

I grant, that this or that actual thought may be the occasion of
volition, or exercising the power a man has to choose; or the actual
choice of the mind, the cause of actual thinking on this or that thing:
as the actual singing of such a tune may be the cause of dancing such a
dance, and the actual dancing of such a dance the occasion of singing
such a tune. But in all these it is not one POWER that operates on
another: but it is the mind that operates, and exerts these powers; it
is the man that does the action; it is the agent that has power, or is
able to do. For powers are relations, not agents: and that which has
the power or not the power to operate, is that alone which is or is not
free, and not the power itself. For freedom, or not freedom, can belong
to nothing but what has or has not a power to act.

20. Liberty belongs not to the Will.

The attributing to faculties that which belonged not to them, has given
occasion to this way of talking: but the introducing into discourses
concerning the mind, with the name of faculties, a notion of THEIR
operating, has, I suppose, as little advanced our knowledge in that
part of ourselves, as the great use and mention of the like invention
of faculties, in the operations of the body, has helped us in the
knowledge of physic. Not that I deny there are faculties, both in the
body and mind: they both of them have their powers of operating, else
neither the one nor the other could operate. For nothing can operate
that is not able to operate; and that is not able to operate that has
no power to operate. Nor do I deny that those words, and the like, are
to have their place in the common use of languages that have made them
current. It looks like too much affectation wholly to lay them by: and
philosophy itself, though it likes not a gaudy dress, yet, when it
appears in public, must have so much complacency as to be clothed in
the ordinary fashion and language of the country, so far as it can
consist with truth and perspicuity. But the fault has been, that
faculties have been spoken of and represented as so many distinct
agents. For, it being asked, what it was that digested the meat in our
stomachs? it was a ready and very satisfactory answer to say, that it
was the DIGESTIVE FACULTY. What was it that made anything come out of
the body? the EXPULSIVE FACULTY. What moved? the MOTIVE FACULTY. And so
in the mind, the INTELLECTUAL FACULTY, or the understanding,
understood; and the ELECTIVE FACULTY, or the will, willed or commanded.
This is, in short, to say, that the ability to digest, digested; and
the ability to move, moved; and the ability to understand, understood.
For faculty, ability, and power, I think, are but different names of
the same things: which ways of speaking, when put into more
intelligible words, will, I think, amount to thus much;—That digestion
is performed by something that is able to digest, motion by something
able to move, and understanding by something able to understand. And,
in truth, it would be very strange if it should be otherwise; as
strange as it would be for a man to be free without being able to be
free.

21. But to the Agent, or Man.

To return, then, to the inquiry about liberty, I think the question is
not proper, WHETHER THE WILL BE FREE, but WHETHER A MAN BE FREE. Thus,
I think,

First, That so far as any one can, by the direction or choice of his
mind, preferring the existence of any action to the non-existence of
that action, and vice versa, make IT to exist or not exist, so far HE
is free. For if I can, by a thought directing the motion of my finger,
make it move when it was at rest, or vice versa, it is evident, that in
respect of that I am free: and if I can, by a like thought of my mind,
preferring one to the other, produce either words or silence, I am at
liberty to speak or hold my peace: and as far as this power reaches, of
acting or not acting, by the determination of his own thought
preferring either, so far is a man free. For how can we think any one
freer, than to have the power to do what he will? And so far as any one
can, by preferring any action to its not being, or rest to any action,
produce that action or rest, so far can he do what he will. For such a
preferring of action to its absence, is the willing of it: and we can
scarce tell how to imagine any being freer, than to be able to do what
he wills. So that in respect of actions within the reach of such a
power in him, a man seems as free as it is possible for freedom to make
him.

22. In respect of willing, a Man is not free.

But the inquisitive mind of man, willing to shift off from himself, as
far as he can, all thoughts of guilt, though it be by putting himself
into a worse state than that of fatal necessity, is not content with
this: freedom, unless it reaches further than this, will not serve the
turn: and it passes for a good plea, that a man is not free at all, if
he be not as FREE TO WILL as he is to ACT WHAT HE WILLS. Concerning a
man’s liberty, there yet, therefore, is raised this further question,
WHETHER A MAN BE FREE TO WILL? which I think is what is meant, when it
is disputed whether the will be free. And as to that I imagine.

23. How a man cannot be free to will.

Secondly, That willing, or volition, being an action, and freedom
consisting in a power of acting or not acting, a man in respect of
willing or the act of volition, when any action in his power is once
proposed to his thoughts, as presently to be done, cannot be free. The
reason whereof is very manifest. For, it being unavoidable that the
action depending on his will should exist or not exist, and its
existence or not existence following perfectly the determination and
preference of his will, he cannot avoid willing the existence or
non-existence of that action; it is absolutely necessary that he will
the one or the other; i.e. prefer the one to the other: since one of
them must necessarily follow; and that which does follow follows by the
choice and determination of his mind; that is, by his willing it: for
if he did not will it, it would not be. So that, in respect of the act
of willing, a man is not free: liberty consisting in a power to act or
not to act; which, in regard of volition, a man, has not.

24. Liberty is freedom to execute what is willed.

This, then, is evident, That A MAN IS NOT AT LIBERTY TO WILL, OR NOT TO
WILL, ANYTHING IN HIS POWER THAT HE ONCE CONSIDERS OF: liberty
consisting in a power to act or to forbear acting, and in that only.
For a man that sits still is said yet to be at liberty; because he can
walk if he wills it. A man that walks is at liberty also, not because
he walks or moves; but because he can stand still if he wills it. But
if a man sitting still has not a power to remove himself, he is not at
liberty; so likewise a man falling down a precipice, though in motion,
is not at liberty, because he cannot stop that motion if he would. This
being so, it is plain that a man that is walking, to whom it is
proposed to give off walking, is not at liberty, whether he will
determine himself to walk, or give off walking or not: he must
necessarily prefer one or the other of them; walking or not walking.
And so it is in regard of all other actions in our power; they being
once proposed, the mind has not a power to act or not to act, wherein
consists liberty. The mind, in that case, has not a power to forbear
WILLING; it cannot avoid some determination concerning them, let the
consideration be as short, the thought as quick as it will, it either
leaves the man in the state he was before thinking, or changes it;
continues the action, or puts an end to it. Whereby it is manifest,
that IT orders and directs one, in preference to, or with neglect of
the other, and thereby either the continuation or change becomes
UNAVOIDABLY voluntary.

25. The Will determined by something without it.

Since then it is plain that, in most cases, a man is not at liberty,
whether he will or no, (for, when an action in his power is proposed to
his thoughts, he CANNOT forbear volition; he MUST determine one way or
the other;) the next thing demanded is,—WHETHER A MAN BE AT LIBERTY TO
WILL WHICH OF THE TWO HE PLEASES, MOTION OR REST? This question carries
the absurdity of it so manifestly in itself, that one might thereby
sufficiently be convinced that liberty concerns not the will. For, to
ask whether a man be at liberty to will either motion or rest, speaking
or silence, which he pleases, is to ask whether a man can will what he
wills, or be pleased with what he is pleased with? A question which, I
think, needs no answer: and they who can make a question of it must
suppose one will to determine the acts of another, and another to
determine that, and so on in infinitum.

26. The ideas of LIBERTY and VOLITION must be defined.

To avoid these and the like absurdities, nothing can be of greater use
than to establish in our minds determined ideas of the things under
consideration. If the ideas of liberty and volition were well fixed in
our understandings, and carried along with us in our minds, as they
ought, through all the questions that are raised about them, I suppose
a great part of the difficulties that perplex men’s thoughts, and
entangle their understandings, would be much easier resolved; and we
should perceive where the confused signification of terms, or where the
nature of the thing caused the obscurity.

27. Freedom.

First, then, it is carefully to be remembered, That freedom consists in
the dependence of the existence, or not existence of any ACTION, upon
our VOLITION of it; and not in the dependence of any action, or its
contrary, on our PREFERENCE. A man standing on a cliff, is at liberty
to leap twenty yards downwards into the sea, not because he has a power
to do the contrary action, which is to leap twenty yards upwards, for
that he cannot do; but he is therefore free, because he has a power to
leap or not to leap. But if a greater force than his, either holds him
fast, or tumbles him down, he is no longer free in that case; because
the doing or forbearance of that particular action is no longer in his
power. He that is a close prisoner in a room twenty feet square, being
at the north side of his chamber, is at liberty to walk twenty feet
southward, because he can walk or not walk it; but is not, at the same
time, at liberty to do the contrary, i.e. to walk twenty feet
northward.

In this, then, consists FREEDOM, viz. in our being able to act or not
to act, according as we shall choose or will.

28. What Volition and action mean.

Secondly, we must remember, that VOLITION or WILLING is an act of the
mind directing its thought to the production of any action, and thereby
exerting its power to produce it. To avoid multiplying of words, I
would crave leave here, under the word ACTION, to comprehend the
forbearance too of any action proposed: sitting still, or holding one’s
peace, when walking or speaking are proposed, though mere forbearances,
requiring as much the determination of the will, and being as often
weighty in their consequences, as the contrary actions, may, on that
consideration, well enough pass for actions too: but this I say, that I
may not be mistaken, if (for brevity’s sake) I speak thus.

29. What determines the Will.

Thirdly, the will being nothing but a power in the mind to direct the
operative faculties of a man to motion or rest as far as they depend on
such direction; to the question, What is it determines the will? the
true and proper answer is, The mind. For that which determines the
general power of directing, to this or that particular direction, is
nothing but the agent itself exercising the power it has that
particular way. If this answer satisfies not, it is plain the meaning
of the question, What determines the will? is this,—What moves the
mind, in every particular instance, to determine its general power of
directing, to this or that particular motion or rest? And to this I
answer,—The motive for continuing in the same state or action, is only
the present satisfaction in it; the motive to change is always some
uneasiness: nothing setting us upon the change of state, or upon any
new action, but some uneasiness. This is the great motive that works on
the mind to put it upon action, which for shortness’ sake we will call
determining of the will, which I shall more at large explain.

30. Will and Desire must not be confounded.

But, in the way to it, it will be necessary to premise, that, though I
have above endeavoured to express the act of volition, by CHOOSING,
PREFERRING, and the like terms, that signify desire as well as
volition, for want of other words to mark that act of the mind whose
proper name is WILLING or VOLITION; yet, it being a very simple act,
whosoever desires to understand what it is, will better find it by
reflecting on his own mind, and observing what it does when it wills,
than by any variety of articulate sounds whatsoever. This caution of
being careful not to be misled by expressions that do not enough keep
up the difference between the WILL and several acts of the mind that
are quite distinct from it, I think the more necessary, because I find
the will often confounded with several of the affections, especially
DESIRE, and one put for the other; and that by men who would not
willingly be thought not to have had very distinct notions of things,
and not to have writ very clearly about them. This, I imagine, has been
no small occasion of obscurity and mistake in this matter; and
therefore is, as much as may be, to be avoided. For he that shall turn
his thoughts inwards upon what passes in his mind when he wills, shall
see that the will or power of volition is conversant about nothing but
our own ACTIONS; terminates there; and reaches no further; and that
volition is nothing but that particular determination of the mind,
whereby, barely by a thought, the mind endeavours to give rise,
continuation, or stop, to any action which it takes to be in its power.
This, well considered, plainly shows that the will is perfectly
distinguished from desire; which, in the very same action, may have a
quite contrary tendency from that which our will sets us upon. A man,
whom I cannot deny, may oblige me to use persuasions to another, which,
at the same time I am speaking, I may wish may not prevail on him. In
this case, it is plain the will and desire run counter. I will the
action; that tends one way, whilst my desire tends another, and that
the direct contrary way. A man who, by a violent fit of the gout in his
limbs, finds a doziness in his head, or a want of appetite in his
stomach removed, desires to be eased too of the pain of his feet or
hands, (for wherever there is pain, there is a desire to be rid of it,)
though yet, whilst he apprehends that the removal of the pain may
translate the noxious humour to a more vital part, his will is never
determined to any one action that may serve to remove this pain. Whence
it is evident that desiring and willing are two distinct acts of the
mind; and consequently, that the will, which is but the power of
volition, is much more distinct from desire.

31. Uneasiness determines the Will.

To return, then, to the inquiry, what is it that determines the will in
regard to our actions? And that, upon second thoughts, I am apt to
imagine is not, as is generally supposed, the greater good in view; but
some (and for the most part the most pressing) UNEASINESS a man is at
present under. This is that which successively determines the will, and
sets us upon those actions we perform. This uneasiness we may call, as
it is, DESIRE; which is an uneasiness of the mind for want of some
absent good. All pain of the body, of what sort soever, and disquiet of
the mind, is uneasiness: and with this is always joined desire, equal
to the pain or uneasiness felt; and is scarce distinguishable from it.
For desire being nothing but an uneasiness in the want of an absent
good, in reference to any pain felt, ease is that absent good; and till
that ease be attained, we may call it desire; nobody feeling pain that
he wishes not to be eased of, with a desire equal to that pain, and
inseparable from it. Besides this desire of ease from pain, there is
another of absent positive good; and here also the desire and
uneasiness are equal. As much as we desire any absent good, so much are
we in pain for it. But here all absent good does not, according to the
greatness it has, or is acknowledged to have, cause pain equal to that
greatness; as all pain causes desire equal to itself: because the
absence of good is not always a pain, as the presence of pain is. And
therefore absent good may be looked on and considered without desire.
But so much as there is anywhere of desire, so much there is of
uneasiness.

32. Desire is Uneasiness.

That desire is a state of uneasiness, every one who reflects on himself
will quickly find. Who is there that has not felt in desire what the
wise man says of hope, (which is not much different from it,) that it
being ‘deferred makes the heart sick’; and that still proportionable to
the greatness of the desire, which sometimes raises the uneasiness to
that pitch, that it makes people cry out, ‘Give me children,’ give me
the thing desired, ‘or I die.’ Life itself, and all its enjoyments, is
a burden cannot be borne under the lasting and unremoved pressure of
such an uneasiness.

33. The Uneasiness of Desire determines the Will.

Good and evil, present and absent, it is true, work upon the mind. But
that which IMMEDIATELY determines the will from time to time, to every
voluntary action, is the UNEASINESS OF DESIRE, fixed on some absent
good: either negative, as indolence to one in pain; or positive, as
enjoyment of pleasure. That it is this uneasiness that determines the
will to the successive voluntary actions, whereof the greatest part of
our lives is made up, and by which we are conducted through different
courses to different ends, I shall endeavour to show, both from
experience, and the reason of the thing.

34. This is the Spring of Action.

When a man is perfectly content with the state he is in—which is when
he is perfectly without any uneasiness—what industry, what action, what
will is there left, but to continue in it? Of this every man’s
observation will satisfy him. And thus we see our all-wise Maker,
suitably to our constitution and frame, and knowing what it is that
determines the will, has put into man the uneasiness of hunger and
thirst, and other natural desires, that return at their seasons, to
move and determine their wills, for the preservation of themselves, and
the continuation of their species. For I think we may conclude, that,
if the BARE CONTEMPLATION of these good ends to which we are carried by
these several uneasinesses had been sufficient to determine the will,
and set us on work, we should have had none of these natural pains, and
perhaps in this world little or no pain at all. ‘It is better to marry
than to burn,’ says St. Paul, where we may see what it is that chiefly
drives men into the enjoyments of a conjugal life. A little burning
felt pushes us more powerfully than greater pleasure in prospect draw
or allure.

35. The greatest positive Good determines not the Will, but present
Uneasiness alone.

It seems so established and settled a maxim, by the general consent of
all mankind, that good, the greater good, determines the will, that I
do not at all wonder that, when I first published my thoughts on this
subject I took it for granted; and I imagine that, by a great many, I
shall be thought more excusable for having then done so, than that now
I have ventured to recede from so received an opinion. But yet, upon a
stricter inquiry, I am forced to conclude that GOOD, the GREATER GOOD,
though apprehended and acknowledged to be so, does not determine the
will, until our desire, raised proportionably to it, makes us uneasy in
the want of it. Convince a man never so much, that plenty has its
advantages over poverty; make him see and own, that the handsome
conveniences of life are better than nasty penury: yet, as long as he
is content with the latter, and finds no uneasiness in it, he moves
not; his will never is determined to any action that shall bring him
out of it. Let a man be ever so well persuaded of the advantages of
virtue, that it is as necessary to a man who has any great aims in this
world, or hopes in the next, as food to life: yet, till he hungers or
thirsts after righteousness, till he FEELS AN UNEASINESS in the want of
it, his WILL will not be determined to any action in pursuit of this
confessed greater good; but any other uneasiness he feels in himself
shall take place, and carry his will to other actions. On the other
side, let a drunkard see that his health decays, his estate wastes;
discredit and diseases, and the want of all things, even of his beloved
drink, attends him in the course he follows: yet the returns of
uneasiness to miss his companions, the habitual thirst after his cups
at the usual time, drives him to the tavern, though he has in his view
the loss of health and plenty, and perhaps of the joys of another life:
the least of which is no inconsiderable good, but such as he confesses
is far greater than the tickling of his palate with a glass of wine, or
the idle chat of a soaking club. It is not want of viewing the greater
good: for he sees and acknowledges it, and, in the intervals of his
drinking hours, will take resolutions to pursue the greater good; but
when the uneasiness to miss his accustomed delight returns, the greater
acknowledged good loses its hold, and the present uneasiness determines
the will to the accustomed action; which thereby gets stronger footing
to prevail against the next occasion, though he at the same time makes
secret promises to himself that he will do so no more; this is the last
time he will act against the attainment of those greater goods. And
thus he is, from time to time, in the state of that unhappy complainer,
Video meliora, proboque, deteriora sequor: which sentence, allowed for
true, and made good by constant experience, may in this, and possibly
no other way, be easily made intelligible.

36. Because the Removal of Uneasiness is the first Step to Happiness.

If we inquire into the reason of what experience makes so evident in
fact, and examine, why it is uneasiness alone operates on the will, and
determines it in its choice, we shall find that, we being capable but
of one determination of the will to one action at once, the present
uneasiness that we are under does NATURALLY determine the will, in
order to that happiness which we all aim at in all our actions. For, as
much as whilst we are under any uneasiness, we cannot apprehend
ourselves happy, or in the way to it; pain and uneasiness being, by
every one, concluded and felt to be inconsistent with happiness,
spoiling the relish even of those good things which we have: a little
pain serving to mar all the pleasure we rejoiced in. And, therefore,
that which of course determines the choice of our will to the next
action will always be—the removing of pain, as long as we have any
left, as the first and necessary step towards happiness.

37. Because Uneasiness alone is present.

Another reason why it is uneasiness alone determines the will, is this:
because that alone is present and, it is against the nature of things,
that what is absent should operate where it is not. It may be said that
absent good may, by contemplation, be brought home to the mind and made
present. The idea of it indeed may be in the mind and viewed as present
there; but nothing will be in the mind as a present good, able to
counterbalance the removal of any uneasiness which we are under, till
it raises our desire; and the uneasiness of that has the prevalency in
determining the will. Till then, the idea in the mind of whatever is
good is there only, like other ideas, the object of bare unactive
speculation; but operates not on the will, nor sets us on work; the
reason whereof I shall show by and by. How many are to be found that
have had lively representations set before their minds of the
unspeakable joys of heaven, which they acknowledge both possible and
probable too, who yet would be content to take up with their happiness
here? And so the prevailing uneasiness of their desires, let loose
after the enjoyments of this life, take their turns in the determining
their wills; and all that while they take not one step, are not one jot
moved, towards the good things of another life, considered as ever so
great.

38. Because all who allow the Joys of Heaven possible, pursue them not.

Were the will determined by the views of good, as it appears in
contemplation greater or less to the understanding, which is the state
of all absent good, and that which, in the received opinion, the will
is supposed to move to, and to be moved by,—I do not see how it could
ever get loose from the infinite eternal joys of heaven, once proposed
and considered as possible. For, all absent good, by which alone,
barely proposed, and coming in view, the will is thought to be
determined, and so to set us on action, being only possible, but not
infallibly certain, it is unavoidable that the infinitely greater
possible good should regularly and constantly determine the will in all
the successive actions it directs; and then we should keep constantly
and steadily in our course towards heaven, without ever standing still,
or directing our actions to any other end: the eternal condition of a
future state infinitely outweighing the expectation of riches, or
honour, or any other worldly pleasure which we can propose to
ourselves, though we should grant these the more probable to be
obtained: for nothing future is yet in possession, and so the
expectation even of these may deceive us. If it were so that the
greater good in view determines the will, so great a good, once
proposed, could not but seize the will, and hold it fast to the pursuit
of this infinitely greatest good, without ever letting it go again: for
the will having a power over, and directing the thoughts, as well as
other actions, would, if it were so, hold the contemplation of the mind
fixed to that good.

39. But any great Uneasiness is never neglected.

This would be the state of the mind, and regular tendency of the will
in all its determinations, were it determined by that which is
considered and in view the greater good. But that it is not so, is
visible in experience; the infinitely greatest confessed good being
often neglected, to satisfy the successive uneasiness of our desires
pursuing trifles. But, though the greatest allowed, even everlasting
unspeakable, good, which has sometimes moved and affected the mind,
does not stedfastly hold the will, yet we see any very great and
prevailing uneasiness having once laid hold on the will, let it not go;
by which we may be convinced, what it is that determines the will. Thus
any vehement pain of the body; the ungovernable passion of a man
violently in love; or the impatient desire of revenge, keeps the will
steady and intent; and the will, thus determined, never lets the
understanding lay by the object, but all the thoughts of the mind and
powers of the body are uninterruptedly employed that way, by the
determination of the will, influenced by that topping uneasiness, as
long as it lasts; whereby it seems to me evident, that the will, or
power of setting us upon one action in preference to all others, is
determined in us by uneasiness: and whether this be not so, I desire
every one to observe in himself.

40. Desire accompanies all Uneasiness.

I have hitherto chiefly instanced in the UNEASINESS of desire, as that
which determines the will: because that is the chief and most sensible;
and the will seldom orders any action, nor is there any voluntary
action performed, without some desire accompanying it; which I think is
the reason why the will and desire are so often confounded. But yet we
are not to look upon the uneasiness which makes up, or at least
accompanies, most of the other passions, as wholly excluded in the
case. Aversion, fear, anger, envy, shame, &c. have each their
uneasinesses too, and thereby influence the will. These passions are
scarce any of them, in life and practice, simple and alone, and wholly
unmixed with others; though usually, in discourse and contemplation,
that carries the name which operates strongest, and appears most in the
present state of the mind. Nay, there is, I think, scarce any of the
passions to be found without desire joined with it. I am sure wherever
there is uneasiness, there is desire. For we constantly desire
happiness; and whatever we feel of uneasiness, so much it is certain we
want of happiness; even in our own opinion, let our state and condition
otherwise be what it will. Besides, the present moment not being our
eternity, whatever our enjoyment be, we look beyond the present, and
desire goes with our foresight, and that still carries the will with
it. So that even in joy itself, that which keeps up the action whereon
the enjoyment depends, is the desire to continue it, and fear to lose
it: and whenever a greater uneasiness than that takes place in the
mind, the will presently is by that determined to some new action, and
the present delight neglected.

41. The most pressing Uneasiness naturally determines the Will.

But we being in this world beset with sundry uneasinesses, distracted
with different desires, the next inquiry naturally will be,—Which of
them has the precedency in determining the will to the next action? and
to that the answer is,—That ordinarily which is the most pressing of
those that are judged capable of being then removed. For, the will
being the power of directing our operative faculties to some action,
for some end, cannot at any time be moved towards what is judged at
that time unattainable: that would be to suppose an intelligent being
designedly to act for an end, only to lose its labour; for so it is to
act for what is judged not attainable; and therefore very great
uneasinesses move not the will, when they are judged not capable of a
cure: they in that case put us not upon endeavours. But, these set
apart the most important and urgent uneasiness we at that time feel, is
that which ordinarily determines the will, successively, in that train
of voluntary actions which makes up our lives. The greatest present
uneasiness is the spur to action, that is constantly most felt, and for
the most part determines the will in its choice of the next action. For
this we must carry along with us, that the proper and only object of
the will is some action of ours, and nothing else. For we producing
nothing by our willing it, but some action in our power, it is there
the will terminates, and reaches no further.

42. All desire Happiness.

If it be further asked,—What it is moves desire? I answer,—happiness,
and that alone. Happiness and misery are the names of two extremes, the
utmost bounds whereof we know not; it is what be in itself good; and
what is apt to produce any degree of pain be evil; yet it often happens
that we do not call it so when it comes in competition with a greater
of its sort; because, when they come in competition, the degrees also
of pleasure and pain have justly a preference. So that if we will
rightly estimate what we call good and evil, we shall find it lies much
in comparison: for the cause of every less degree of pain, as well as
every greater degree of pleasure, has the nature of good, and vice
versa.

43. [* missing]

44. What Good is desired, what not.

Though this be that which is called good and evil, and all good be the
proper object of desire in general; yet all good, even seen and
confessed to be so, does not necessarily move every particular man’s
desire; but only that part, or so much of it as is considered and taken
to make a necessary part of HIS happiness. All other good, however
great in reality or appearance, excites not a man’s desires who looks
not on it to make a part of that happiness wherewith he, in his present
thoughts, can satisfy himself. Happiness, under this view, every one
constantly pursues, and desires what makes any part of it: other
things, acknowledged to be good, he can look upon without desire, pass
by, and be content without. There is nobody, I think, so senseless as
to deny that there is pleasure in knowledge: and for the pleasures of
sense, they have too many followers to let it be questioned whether men
are taken with them or no. Now, let one man place his satisfaction in
sensual pleasures, another in the delight of knowledge: though each of
them cannot but confess, there is great pleasure in what the other
pursues; yet, neither of them making the other’s delight a part of HIS
happiness, their desires are not moved, but each is satisfied without
what the other enjoys; and so his will is not determined to the pursuit
of it. But yet, as soon as the studious man’s hunger and thirst make
him uneasy, he, whose will was never determined to any pursuit of good
cheer, poignant sauces, delicious wine, by the pleasant taste he has
found in them, is, by the uneasiness of hunger and thirst, presently
determined to eating and drinking, though possibly with great
indifferency, what wholesome food comes in his way. And, on the other
side, the epicure buckles to study, when shame, or the desire to
recommend himself to his mistress, shall make him uneasy in the want of
any sort of knowledge. Thus, how much soever men are in earnest and
constant in pursuit of happiness, yet they may have a clear view of
good, great and confessed good, without being concerned for it, or
moved by it, if they think they can make up their happiness without it.
Though as to pain, THAT they are always concerned for; they can feel no
uneasiness without being moved. And therefore, being uneasy in the want
of whatever is judged necessary to their happiness, as soon as any good
appears to make a part of their portion of happiness, they begin to
desire it.

45. Why the greatest Good is not always desired.

This, I think, any one may observe in himself and others,—That the
greater visible good does not always raise men’s desires in proportion
to the greatness it appears, and is acknowledged, to have: though every
little trouble moves us, and sets us on work to get rid of it. The
reason whereof is evident from the nature of our happiness and misery
itself. All present pain, whatever it be, makes a part of our present
misery: but all absent good does not at any time make a necessary part
of our present happiness, nor the absence of it make a part of our
misery. If it did, we should be constantly and infinitely miserable;
there being infinite degrees of happiness which are not in our
possession. All uneasiness therefore being removed, a moderate portion
of good serve at present to content men; and a few degrees of pleasure
in a succession of ordinary enjoyments, make up a happiness wherein
they can be satisfied. If this were not so, there could be no room for
those indifferent and visibly trifling actions, to which our wills are
so often determined, and wherein we voluntarily waste so much of our
lives; which remissness could by no means consist with a constant
determination of will or desire to the greatest apparent good. That
this is so, I think few people need go far from home to be convinced.
And indeed in this life there are not many whose happiness reaches so
far as to afford them a constant train of moderate mean pleasures,
without any mixture of uneasiness; and yet they could be content to
stay here for ever: though they cannot deny, but that it is possible
there may be a state of eternal durable joys after this life, far
surpassing all the good that is to be found here. Nay, they cannot but
see that it is more possible than the attainment and continuation of
that pittance of honour, riches, or pleasure which they pursue, and for
which they neglect that eternal state. But yet, in full view of this
difference, satisfied of the possibility of a perfect, secure, and
lasting happiness in a future state, and under a clear conviction that
it is not to be had here,—whilst they bound their happiness within some
little enjoyment or aim of this life, and exclude the joys of heaven
from making any necessary part of it,—their desires are not moved by
this greater apparent good, nor their wills determined to any action,
or endeavour for its attainment.

46. Why not being desired, it moves not the Will.

The ordinary necessities of our lives fill a great part of them with
the uneasinesses of hunger, thirst, heat, cold, weariness, with labour,
and sleepiness, in their constant returns, &c. To which, if, besides
accidental harms, we add the fantastical uneasiness (as itch after
honour, power, or riches, &c.) which acquired habits, by fashion,
example, and education, have settled in us, and a thousand other
irregular desires, which custom has made natural to us, we shall find
that a very little part of our life is so vacant from THESE
uneasinesses, as to leave us free to the attraction of remoter absent
good. We are seldom at ease, and free enough from the solicitation of
our natural or adopted desires, but a constant succession of
uneasinesses out of that stock which natural wants or acquired habits
have heaped up, take the will in their turns; and no sooner is one
action dispatched, which by such a determination of the will we are set
upon, but another uneasiness is ready to set us on work. For, the
removing of the pains we feel, and are at present pressed with, being
the getting out of misery, and consequently the first thing to be done
in order to happiness,—absent good, though thought on, confessed, and
appearing to be good, not making any part of this unhappiness in its
absence, is justled out, to make way for the removal of those
uneasinesses we feel; till due and repeated contemplation has brought
it nearer to our mind, given some relish of it, and raised in us some
desire: which then beginning to make a part of our present uneasiness,
stands upon fair terms with the rest to be satisfied, and so, according
to its greatness and pressure, comes in its turn to determine the will.

47. Due Consideration raises Desire.

And thus, by a due consideration, and examining any good proposed, it
is in our power to raise our desires in a due proportion to the value
of that good, whereby in its turn and place it may come to work upon
the will, and be pursued. For good, though appearing and allowed ever
so great, yet till it has raised desires in our minds, and thereby made
us uneasy in its want, it reaches not our wills; we are not within the
sphere of its activity, our wills being under the determination only of
those uneasinesses which are present to us, which (whilst we have any)
are always soliciting, and ready at hand, to give the will its next
determination. The balancing, when there is any in the mind, being
only, which desire shall be next satisfied, which uneasiness first
removed. Whereby it comes to pass that, as long as any uneasiness, any
desire, remains in our mind, there is no room for good, barely as such,
to come at the will, or at all to determine it. Because, as has been
said, the FIRST step in our endeavours after happiness being to get
wholly out of the confines of misery, and to feel no part of it, the
will can be at leisure for nothing else, till every uneasiness we feel
be perfectly removed: which, in the multitude of wants and desires we
are beset with in this imperfect state, we are not like to be ever
freed from in this world.

48. The Power to suspend the Prosecution of any Desire makes way for
consideration.

There being in us a great many uneasinesses, always soliciting and
ready to determine the will, it is natural, as I have said, that the
greatest and most pressing should determine the will to the next
action; and so it does for the most part, but not always. For, the mind
having in most cases, as is evident in experience, a power to SUSPEND
the execution and satisfaction of any of its desires; and so all, one
after another; is at liberty to consider the objects of them, examine
them on all sides, and weigh them with others. In this lies the liberty
man has; and from the not using of it right comes all that variety of
mistakes, errors, and faults which we run into in the conduct of our
lives, and our endeavours after happiness; whilst we precipitate the
determination of our wills, and engage too soon, before due
examination. To prevent this, we have a power to suspend the
prosecution of this or that desire; as every one daily may experiment
in himself. This seems to me the source of all liberty; in this seems
to consist that which is (as I think improperly) called FREE-WILL. For,
during this suspension of any desire, before the will be determined to
action, and the action (which follows that determination) done, we have
opportunity to examine, view, and judge of the good or evil of what we
are going to do; and when, upon due examination, we have judged, we
have done our duty, all that we can, or ought to do, in pursuit of our
happiness; and it is not a fault, but a perfection of our nature, to
desire, will, and act according to the last result of a fair
examination.

49. To be determined by our own Judgment, is no Restraint to Liberty.

This is so far from being a restraint or diminution of freedom, that it
is the very improvement and benefit of it; it is not an abridgment, it
is the end and use of our liberty; and the further we are removed from
such a determination, the nearer we are to misery and slavery. A
perfect indifference in the mind, not determinable by its last judgment
of the good or evil that is thought to attend its choice, would be so
far from being an advantage and excellency of any intellectual nature,
that it would be as great an imperfection, as the want of indifferency
to act, or not to act, till determined by the will, would be an
imperfection on the other side. A man is at liberty to lift up his hand
to his head, or let it rest quiet: he is perfectly indifferent in
either; and it would be an imperfection in him, if he wanted that
power, if he were deprived of that indifferency. But it would be as
great an imperfection, if he had the same indifferency, whether he
would prefer the lifting up his hand, or its remaining in rest, when it
would save his head or eyes from a blow he sees coming: it is as much a
perfection, that desire, or the power of preferring, should be
determined by good, as that the power of acting should be determined by
the will; and the certainer such determination is, the greater is the
perfection. Nay, were we determined by anything but the last result of
our own minds, judging of the good or evil of any action, we were not
free.

50. The freest Agents are so determined.

If we look upon those superior beings above us, who enjoy perfect
happiness, we shall have reason to judge that they are more steadily
determined in their choice of good than we; and yet we have no reason
to think they are less happy, or less free, than we are. And if it were
fit for such poor finite creatures as we are to pronounce what infinite
wisdom and goodness could do, I think we might say, that God himself
CANNOT choose what is not good; the freedom of the Almighty hinders not
his being determined by what is best.

51. A constant Determination to a Pursuit of Happiness no Abridgment of
Liberty.

But to give a right view of this mistaken part of liberty let me
ask,—Would any one be a changeling, because he is less determined by
wise considerations than a wise man? Is it worth the name of freedom to
be at liberty to play the fool, and draw shame and misery upon a man’s
self? If to break loose from the conduct of reason, and to want that
restraint of examination and judgment which keeps us from choosing or
doing the worse, be liberty, true liberty, madmen and fools are the
only freemen: but yet, I think, nobody would choose to be mad for the
sake of such liberty, but he that is mad already. The constant desire
of happiness, and the constraint it puts upon us to act for it, nobody,
I think, accounts an abridgment of liberty, or at least an abridgment
of liberty to be complained of. God Almighty himself is under the
necessity of being happy; and the more any intelligent being is so, the
nearer is its approach to infinite perfection and happiness. That, in
this state of ignorance, we short-sighted creatures might not mistake
true felicity, we are endowed with a power to suspend any particular
desire, and keep it from determining the will, and engaging us in
action. This is standing still, where we are not sufficiently assured
of the way: examination is consulting a guide. The determination of the
will upon inquiry, is following the direction of that guide: and he
that has a power to act or not to act, according as SUCH determination
directs, is a free agent: such determination abridges not that power
wherein liberty consists. He that has his chains knocked off, and the
prison doors set open to him, is perfectly at liberty, because he may
either go or stay, as he best likes, though his preference be
determined to stay, by the darkness of the night, or illness of the
weather, or want of other lodging. He ceases not to be free; though the
desire of some convenience to be had there absolutely determines his
preference, and makes him stay in his prison.

52. The Necessity of pursuing true Happiness the Foundation of Liberty.

As therefore the highest perfection of intellectual nature lies in a
careful and constant pursuit of true and solid happiness; so the care
of ourselves, that we mistake not imaginary for real happiness, is the
necessary foundation of our liberty. The stronger ties we have to an
unalterable pursuit of happiness in general, which is our greatest
good, and which as such, our desires always follow, the more are we
free from any necessary determination of our will to any particular
action, and from a necessary compliance with our desire, so upon any
particular, and then appearing preferable good, till we have duly
examined whether it has a tendency to, or be inconsistent with, our
real happiness: and therefore, till we are as much informed upon this
inquiry as the weight of the matter, and the nature of the case
demands, we are, by the necessity of preferring and pursuing true
happiness as our greatest good, obliged to suspend the satisfaction of
our desires in particular cases.

53. Power to Suspend.

This is the hinge on which turns the LIBERTY of intellectual beings, in
their constant endeavours after, and a steady prosecution of true
felicity,—That they CAN SUSPEND this prosecution in particular cases,
till they have looked before them, and informed themselves whether that
particular thing which is then proposed or desired lie in the way to
their main end, and make a real part of that which is their greatest
good. For, the inclination and tendency of their nature to happiness is
an obligation and motive to them, to take care not to mistake or miss
it; and so necessarily puts them upon caution, deliberation, and
wariness, in the direction of their particular actions, which are the
means to obtain it. Whatever necessity determines to the pursuit of
real bliss, the same necessity, with the same force, establishes
suspense, deliberation, and scrutiny of each successive desire, whether
the satisfaction of it does not interfere with our true happiness, and
mislead us from it. This, as seems to me, is the great privilege of
finite intellectual beings; and I desire it may be well considered,
whether the great inlet and exercise of all the liberty men have, are
capable of, or can be useful to them, and that whereon depends the turn
of their actions, does not lie in this,—That they can suspend their
desires, and stop them from determining their wills to any action, till
they have duly and fairly examined the good and evil of it, as far
forth as the weight of the thing requires. This we are able to do; and
when we have done it, we have done our duty, and all that is in our
power; and indeed all that needs. For, since the will supposes
knowledge to guide its choice, all that we can do is to hold our wills
undetermined, till we have examined the good and evil of what we
desire. What follows after that, follows in a chain of consequences,
linked one to another, all depending on the last determination of the
judgment, which, whether it shall be upon a hasty and precipitate view,
or upon a due and mature examination, is in our power; experience
showing us, that in most cases, we are able to suspend the present
satisfaction of any desire.

54. Government of our Passions the right Improvement of Liberty.

But if any extreme disturbance (as sometimes it happens) possesses our
whole mind, as when the pain of the rack, an impetuous uneasiness, as
of love, anger, or any other violent passion, running away with us,
allows us not the liberty of thought, and we are not masters enough of
our own minds to consider thoroughly and examine fairly;—God, who knows
our frailty, pities our weakness, and requires of us no more than we
are able to do, and sees what was and what was not in our power, will
judge as a kind and merciful Father. But the forbearance of a too hasty
compliance with our desires, the moderation and restraint of our
passions, so that our understandings may be free to examine, and reason
unbiassed, give its judgment, being that whereon a right direction of
our conduct to true happiness depends; it is in this we should employ
our chief care and endeavours. In this we should take pains to suit the
relish of our minds to the true intrinsic good or ill that is in
things; and not permit an allowed or supposed possible great and
weighty good to slip out of our thoughts, without leaving any relish,
any desire of itself there till, by a due consideration of its true
worth, we have formed appetites in our minds suitable to it, and made
ourselves uneasy in the want of it, or in the fear of losing it. And
how much this is in every one’s power, by making resolutions to
himself, such as he may keep, is easy for every one to try. Nor let any
one say, he cannot govern his passions, nor hinder them from breaking
out, and carrying him into action; for what he can do before a prince
or a great man, he can do alone, or in the presence of God, if he will.

55. How Men come to pursue different, and often evil Courses.

From what has been said, it is easy to give an account how it comes to
pass, that, though all men desire happiness, yet their wills carry them
so contrarily; and consequently, some of them to what is evil. And to
this I say, that the various and contrary choices that men make in the
world do not argue that they do not all pursue good; but that the same
thing is not good to every man alike. This variety of pursuits shows,
that every one does not place his happiness in the same thing, or
choose the same way to it. Were all the concerns of man terminated in
this life, why one followed study and knowledge, and another hawking
and hunting: why one chose luxury and debauchery, and another sobriety
and riches, would not be because every one of these did NOT aim at his
own happiness; but because their happiness was placed in different
things. And therefore it was a right answer of the physician to his
patient that had sore eyes:—If you have more pleasure in the taste of
wine than in the use of your sight, wine is good for you; but if the
pleasure of seeing be greater to you than that of drinking, wine is
naught.

56. All men seek happiness, but not of the same sort.

The mind has a different relish, as well as the palate; and you will as
fruitlessly endeavour to delight all men with riches or glory (which
yet some men place their happiness in) as you would to satisfy all
men’s hunger with cheese or lobsters; which, though very agreeable and
delicious fare to some, are to others extremely nauseous and offensive:
and many persons would with reason prefer the griping of an hungry
belly to those dishes which are a feast to others. Hence it was, I
think, that the philosophers of old did in vain inquire, whether summum
bonum consisted in riches, or bodily delights, or virtue, or
contemplation: and they might have as reasonably disputed, whether the
best relish were to be found in apples, plums, or nuts, and have
divided themselves into sects upon it. For, as pleasant tastes depend
not on the things themselves, but on their agreeableness to this or
that particular palate, wherein there is great variety; so the greatest
happiness consists in the having those things which produce the
greatest pleasure, and in the absence of those which cause any
disturbance, any pain. Now these, to different men, are very different
things. If, therefore, men in this life only have hope; if in this life
only they can enjoy, it is not strange nor unreasonable, that they
should seek their happiness by avoiding all things that disease them
here, and by pursuing all that delight them; wherein it will be no
wonder to find variety and difference. For if there be no prospect
beyond the grave, the inference is certainly right—‘Let us eat and
drink,’ let us enjoy what we delight in, ‘for to-morrow we shall die.’
This, I think, may serve to show us the reason, why, though all men’s
desires tend to happiness, yet they are not moved by the same object.
Men may choose different things, and yet all choose right; supposing
them only like a company of poor insects; whereof some are bees,
delighted with flowers and their sweetness; others beetles, delighted
with other kinds of viands, which having enjoyed for a season, they
would cease to be, and exist no more for ever.

57. [not in early editions]

58. Why men choose what makes them miserable.

What has been said may also discover to us the reason why men in this
world prefer different things, and pursue happiness by contrary
courses. But yet, since men are always constant and in earnest in
matters of happiness and misery, the question still remains, How men
come often to prefer the worse to the better; and to choose that,
which, by their own confession, has made them miserable?

59. The causes of this.

To account for the various and contrary ways men take, though all aim
at being happy, we must consider whence the VARIOUS UNEASINESSES that
determine the will, in the preference of each voluntary action, have
their rise:—

1. From bodily pain.

Some of them come from causes not in our power; such as are often the
pains of the body from want, disease, or outward injuries, as the rack,
etc.; which, when present and violent, operate for the most part
forcibly on the will, and turn the courses of men’s lives from virtue,
piety, and religion, and what before they judged to lead to happiness;
every one not endeavouring, or not being able, by the contemplation of
remote and future good, to raise in himself desires of them strong
enough to counterbalance the uneasiness he feels in those bodily
torments, and to keep his will steady in the choice of those actions
which lead to future happiness. A neighbouring country has been of late
a tragical theatre from which we might fetch instances, if there needed
any, and the world did not in all countries and ages furnish examples
enough to confirm that received observation: NECESSITAS COGIT AD
TURPIA; and therefore there is great reason for us to pray, ‘Lead us
not into temptation.’

2. From wrong Desires arising from wrong Judgments.

Other uneasinesses arise from our desires of absent good; which desires
always bear proportion to, and depend on, the judgment we make, and the
relish we have of any absent good; in both which we are apt to be
variously misled, and that by our own fault.

60. Our judgment of present Good or Evil always right.

In the first place, I shall consider the wrong judgments men make of
FUTURE good and evil, whereby their desires are misled. For, as to
PRESENT happiness and misery, when that alone comes into consideration,
and the consequences are quite removed, a man never chooses amiss: he
knows what best pleases him, and that he actually prefers. Things in
their present enjoyment are what they seem: the apparent and real good
are, in this case, always the same. For the pain or pleasure being just
so great and no greater than it is felt, the present good or evil is
really so much as it appears. And therefore were every action of ours
concluded within itself, and drew no consequences after it, we should
undoubtedly never err in our choice of good: we should always
infallibly prefer the best. Were the pains of honest industry, and of
starving with hunger and cold set together before us, nobody would be
in doubt which to choose: were the satisfaction of a lust and the joys
of heaven offered at once to any one’s present possession, he would not
balance, or err in the determination of his choice.

61. Our wrong judgments have regard to future good and evil only.

But since our voluntary actions carry not all the happiness and misery
that depend on them along with them in their present performance, but
are the precedent causes of good and evil, which they draw after them,
and bring upon us, when they themselves are past and cease to be; our
desires look beyond our present enjoyments, and carry the mind out to
ABSENT GOOD, according to the necessity which we think there is of it,
to the making or increase of our happiness. It is our opinion of such a
necessity that gives it its attraction: without that, we are not moved
by absent good. For, in this narrow scantling of capacity which we are
accustomed to and sensible of here, wherein we enjoy but one pleasure
at once, which, when all uneasiness is away, is, whilst it lasts,
sufficient to make us think ourselves happy, it is not all remote and
even apparent good that affects us. Because the indolency and enjoyment
we have, sufficing for our present happiness, we desire not to venture
the change; since we judge that we are happy already, being content,
and that is enough. For who is content is happy. But as soon as any new
uneasiness comes in, this happiness is disturbed, and we are set afresh
on work in the pursuit of happiness.

62. From a wrong Judgment of what makes a necessary Part of their
Happiness.

Their aptness therefore to conclude that they can be happy without it,
is one great occasion that men often are not raised to the desire of
the greatest ABSENT good. For, whilst such thoughts possess them, the
joys of a future state move them not; they have little concern or
uneasiness about them; and the will, free from the determination of
such desires, is left to the pursuit of nearer satisfactions, and to
the removal of those uneasinesses which it then feels, in its want of
any longings after them. Change but a man’s view of these things; let
him see that virtue and religion are necessary to his happiness; let
him look into the future state of bliss or misery, and see there God,
the righteous Judge, ready to ‘render to every man according to his
deeds; to them who by patient continuance in well-doing seek for glory,
and honour, and immortality, eternal life; but unto every soul that
doth evil, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish.’ To him, I
say, who hath a prospect of the different state of perfect happiness or
misery that attends all men after this life, depending on their
behaviour here, the measures of good and evil that govern his choice
are mightily changed. For, since nothing of pleasure and pain in this
life can bear any proportion to the endless happiness or exquisite
misery of an immortal soul hereafter, actions in his power will have
their preference, not according to the transient pleasure or pain that
accompanies or follows them here, but as they serve to secure that
perfect durable happiness hereafter.

63. A more particular Account of wrong Judgments.

But, to account more particularly for the misery that men often bring
on themselves, notwithstanding that they do all in earnest pursue
happiness, we must consider how things come to be represented to our
desires under deceitful appearances: and that is by the judgment
pronouncing wrongly concerning them. To see how far this reaches, and
what are the causes of wrong judgment, we must remember that things are
judged good or bad in a double sense:—

First, THAT WHICH IS PROPERLY GOOD OR BAD, IS NOTHING BUT BARELY
PLEASURE OR PAIN.

Secondly, But because not only present pleasure and pain, but that also
which is apt by its efficacy or consequences to bring it upon us at a
distance, is a proper object of our desires, and apt to move a creature
that has foresight; therefore THINGS ALSO THAT DRAW AFTER THEM PLEASURE
AND PAIN, ARE CONSIDERED AS GOOD AND EVIL.

64. No one chooses misery willingly, but only by wrong judgment.

The wrong judgment that misleads us, and makes the will often fasten on
the worse side, lies in misreporting upon the various comparisons of
these. The wrong judgment I am here speaking of is not what one man may
think of the determination of another, but what every man himself must
confess to be wrong. For, since I lay it for a certain ground, that
every intelligent being really seeks happiness, which consists in the
enjoyment of pleasure, without any considerable mixture of uneasiness;
it is impossible any one should willingly put into his own draught any
bitter ingredient, or leave out anything in his power that would tend
to his satisfaction, and the completing of his happiness, but only by a
WRONG JUDGMENT. I shall not here speak of that mistake which is the
consequence of INVINCIBLE error, which scarce deserves the name of
wrong judgment; but of that wrong judgment which every man himself must
confess to be so.

65. Men may err on comparing Present and Future.

(I) Therefore, as to present pleasure and pain, the mind, as has been
said, never mistakes that which is really good or evil; that which is
the greater pleasure, or the greater pain, is really just as it
appears. But, though present pleasure and pain show their difference
and degrees so plainly as not to leave room to mistake; yet, WHEN WE
COMPARE PRESENT PLEASURE OR PAIN WITH FUTURE, (which is usually the
case in most important determinations of the will,) we often make wrong
judgments of them; taking our measures of them in different positions
of distance. Objects near our view are apt to be thought greater than
those of a larger size that are more remote. And so it is with
pleasures and pains: the present is apt to carry it; and those at a
distance have the disadvantage in the comparison. Thus most men, like
spendthrift heirs, are apt to judge a little in hand better than a
great deal to come; and so, for small matters in possession, part with
greater ones in reversion. But that this is a wrong judgment every one
must allow, let his pleasure consist in whatever it will: since that
which is future will certainly come to be present; and then, having the
same advantage of nearness, will show itself in its full dimensions,
and discover his wilful mistake who judged of it by unequal measures.
Were the pleasure of drinking accompanied, the very moment a man takes
off his glass, with that sick stomach and aching head which, in some
men, are sure to follow not many hours after, I think nobody, whatever
pleasure he had in his cups, would, on these conditions, ever let wine
touch his lips; which yet he daily swallows, and the evil side comes to
be chosen only by the fallacy of a little difference in time. But, if
pleasure or pain can be so lessened only by a few hours’ removal, how
much more will it be so by a further distance to a man that will not,
by a right judgment, do what time will, i. e. bring it home upon
himself, and consider it as present, and there take its true
dimensions? This is the way we usually impose on ourselves, in respect
of bare pleasure and pain, or the true degrees of happiness or misery:
the future loses its just proportion, and what is present obtains the
preference as the greater. I mention not here the wrong judgment,
whereby the absent are not only lessened, but reduced to perfect
nothing; when men enjoy what they can in present, and make sure of
that, concluding amiss that no evil will thence follow. For that lies
not in comparing the greatness of future good and evil, which is that
we are here speaking of; but in another sort of wrong judgment, which
is concerning good or evil, as it is considered to be the cause and
procurement of pleasure or pain that will follow from it.

66. Causes of our judging amiss when we compare present pleasure and
pain with future.

The cause of our judging amiss, when we compare our present pleasure or
pain with future, seems to me to be THE WEAK AND NARROW CONSTITUTION OF
OUR MINDS. We cannot well enjoy two pleasures at once; much less any
pleasure almost, whilst pain possesses us. The present pleasure, if it
be not very languid, and almost none at all, fills our narrow souls,
and so takes up the whole mind that it scarce leaves any thought of
things absent: or if among our pleasures there are some which are not
strong enough to exclude the consideration of things at a distance, yet
we have so great an abhorrence of pain, that a little of it
extinguishes all our pleasures. A little bitter mingled in our cup,
leaves no relish of the sweet. Hence it comes that, at any rate, we
desire to be rid of the present evil, which we are apt to think nothing
absent can equal; because, under the present pain, we find not
ourselves capable of any the least degree of happiness. Men’s daily
complaints are a loud proof of this: the pain that any one actually
feels is still of all other the worst; and it is with anguish they cry
out,—‘Any rather than this: nothing can be so intolerable as what I now
suffer.’ And therefore our whole endeavours and thoughts are intent to
get rid of the present evil, before all things, as the first necessary
condition to our happiness; let what will follow. Nothing, as we
passionately think, can exceed, or almost equal, the uneasiness that
sits so heavy upon us. And because the abstinence from a present
pleasure that offers itself is a pain, nay, oftentimes a very great
one, the desire being inflamed by a near and tempting object, it is no
wonder that that operates after the same manner pain does, and lessens
in our thoughts what is future; and so forces us, as it were blindfold,
into its embraces.

67. Absent good unable to counterbalance present uneasiness.

Add to this, that absent good, or, which is the same thing, future
pleasure,—especially if of a sort we are unacquainted with,—seldom is
able to counterbalance any uneasiness, either of pain or desire, which
is present. For, its greatness being no more than what shall be really
tasted when enjoyed, men are apt enough to lessen that; to make it give
place to any present desire; and conclude with themselves that, when it
comes to trial, it may possibly not answer the report or opinion that
generally passes of it: they having often found that, not only what
others have magnified, but even what they themselves have enjoyed with
great pleasure and delight at one time, has proved insipid or nauseous
at another; and therefore they see nothing in it for which they should
forego a present enjoyment. But that this is a false way of judging,
when applied to the happiness of another life, they must confess;
unless they will say, God cannot make those happy he designs to be so.
For that being intended for a state of happiness, it must certainly be
agreeable to every one’s wish and desire: could we suppose their
relishes as different there as they are here, yet the manna in heaven
will suit every one’s palate. Thus much of the wrong judgment we make
of present and future pleasure and pain, when they are compared
together, and so the absent considered as future.

68. Wrong judgment in considering Consequences of Actions.

(II). As to THINGS GOOD OR BAD IN THEIR CONSEQUENCES, and by the
aptness that is in them to procure us good or evil in the future, we
judge amiss several ways.

1. When we judge that so much evil does not really depend on them as in
truth there does.

2. When we judge that, though the consequence be of that moment, yet it
is not of that certainty, but that it may otherwise fall out, or else
by some means be avoided; as by industry, address, change, repentance,
&c.

That these are wrong ways of judging, were easy to show in every
particular, if I would examine them at large singly: but I shall only
mention this in general, viz. that it is a very wrong and irrational
way of proceeding, to venture a greater good for a less, upon uncertain
guesses; and before a due examination be made, proportionable to the
weightiness of the matter, and the concernment it is to us not to
mistake. This I think every one must confess, especially if he
considers the usual cause of this wrong judgment, whereof these
following are some:—

69. Causes of this.

(i) IGNORANCE: He that judges without informing himself to the utmost
that he is capable, cannot acquit himself of judging amiss.

(ii) INADVERTENCY: When a man overlooks even that which he does know.
This is an affected and present ignorance, which misleads our judgments
as much as the other. Judging is, as it were, balancing an account, and
determining on which side the odds lie. If therefore either side be
huddled up in haste, and several of the sums that should have gone into
the reckoning be overlooked and left out, this precipitancy causes as
wrong a judgment as if it were a perfect ignorance. That which most
commonly causes this is, the prevalency of some present pleasure or
pain, heightened by our feeble passionate nature, most strongly wrought
on by what is present. To check this precipitancy, our understanding
and reason were given us, if we will make a right use of them, to
search and see, and then judge thereupon. How much sloth and
negligence, heat and passion, the prevalency of fashion or acquired
indispositions do severally contribute, on occasion, to these wrong
judgments, I shall not here further inquire. I shall only add one other
false judgment, which I think necessary to mention, because perhaps it
is little taken notice of, though of great influence.

70. Wrong judgment of what is necessary to our Happiness.

All men desire happiness, that is past doubt: but, as has been already
observed, when they are rid of pain, they are apt to take up with any
pleasure at hand, or that custom has endeared to them; to rest
satisfied in that; and so being happy, till some new desire, by making
them uneasy, disturbs that happiness, and shows them that they are not
so, they look no further; nor is the will determined to any action in
pursuit of any other known or apparent good. For since we find that we
cannot enjoy all sorts of good, but one excludes another; we do not fix
our desires on every apparent greater good, unless it be judged to be
necessary to our happiness: if we think we can be happy without it, it
moves us not. This is another occasion to men of judging wrong; when
they take not that to be necessary to their happiness which really is
so. This mistake misleads us, both in the choice of the good we aim at,
and very often in the means to it, when it is a remote good. But, which
way ever it be, either by placing it where really it is not, or by
neglecting the means as not necessary to it;—when a man misses his
great end, happiness, he will acknowledge he judged not right. That
which contributes to this mistake is the real or supposed
unpleasantness of the actions which are the way to this end; it seeming
so preposterous a thing to men, to make themselves unhappy in order to
happiness, that they do not easily bring themselves to it.

71. We can change the Agreeableness or Disagreeableness in Things.

The last inquiry, therefore, concerning this matter is,—Whether it be
in a man’s power to change the pleasantness and unpleasantness that
accompanies any sort of action? And as to that, it is plain, in many
cases he can. Men may and should correct their palates, and give relish
to what either has, or they suppose has none. The relish of the mind is
as various as that of the body, and like that too may be altered; and
it is a mistake to think that men cannot change the displeasingness or
indifferency that is in actions into pleasure and desire, if they will
do but what is in their power. A due consideration will do it in some
cases; and practice, application, and custom in most. Bread or tobacco
may be neglected where they are shown to be useful to health, because
of an indifferency or disrelish to them; reason and consideration at
first recommends, and begins their trial, and use finds, or custom
makes them pleasant. That this is so in virtue too, is very certain.
Actions are pleasing or displeasing, either in themselves, or
considered as a means to a greater and more desirable end. The eating
of a well-seasoned dish, suited to a man’s palate, may move the mind by
the delight itself that accompanies the eating, without reference to
any other end; to which the consideration of the pleasure there is in
health and strength (to which that meat is subservient) may add a new
GUSTO, able to make us swallow an ill-relished potion. In the latter of
these, any action is rendered more or less pleasing, only by the
contemplation of the end, and the being more or less persuaded of its
tendency to it, or necessary connexion with it: but the pleasure of the
action itself is best acquired or increased by use and practice. Trials
often reconcile us to that, which at a distance we looked on with
aversion; and by repetitions wear us into a liking of what possibly, in
the first essay, displeased us. Habits have powerful charms, and put so
strong attractions of easiness and pleasure into what we accustom
ourselves to, that we cannot forbear to do, or at least be easy in the
omission of, actions, which habitual practice has suited, and thereby
recommends to us. Though this be very visible, and every one’s
experience shows him he can do so; yet it is a part in the conduct of
men towards their happiness, neglected to a degree, that it will be
possibly entertained as a paradox, if it be said, that men can MAKE
things or actions more or less pleasing to themselves; and thereby
remedy that, to which one may justly impute a great deal of their
wandering. Fashion and the common opinion having settled wrong notions,
and education and custom ill habits, the just values of things are
misplaced, and the palates of men corrupted. Pains should be taken to
rectify these; and contrary habits change our pleasures, and give a
relish to that which is necessary or conducive to our happiness. This
every one must confess he can do; and when happiness is lost, and
misery overtakes him, he will confess he did amiss in neglecting it,
and condemn himself for it; and I ask every one, whether he has not
often done so?

72. Preference of Vice to Virtue a manifest wrong Judgment.

I shall not now enlarge any further on the wrong judgments and neglect
of what is in their power, whereby men mislead themselves. This would
make a volume, and is not my business. But whatever false notions, or
shameful neglect of what is in their power, may put men out of their
way to happiness, and distract them, as we see, into so different
courses of life, this yet is certain, that morality established upon
its true foundations, cannot but determine the choice in any one that
will but consider: and he that will not be so far a rational creature
as to reflect seriously upon INFINITE happiness and misery, must needs
condemn himself as not making that use of his understanding he should.
The rewards and punishments of another life which the Almighty has
established, as the enforcements of his law, are of weight enough to
determine the choice against whatever pleasure or pain this life can
show, where the eternal state is considered but in its bare possibility
which nobody can make any doubt of. He that will allow exquisite and
endless happiness to be but the possible consequence of a good life
here, and the contrary state the possible reward of a bad one, must own
himself to judge very much amiss if he does not conclude,—That a
virtuous life, with the certain expectation of everlasting bliss, which
may come, is to be preferred to a vicious one, with the fear of that
dreadful state of misery, which it is very possible may overtake the
guilty; or, at best, the terrible uncertain hope of annihilation. This
is evidently so, though the virtuous life here had nothing but pain,
and the vicious continual pleasure: which yet is, for the most part,
quite otherwise, and wicked men have not much the odds to brag of, even
in their present possession; nay, all things rightly considered, have,
I think, even the worse part here. But when infinite happiness is put
into one scale, against infinite misery in the other; if the worst that
comes to the pious man, if he mistakes, be the best that the wicked can
attain to, if he be in the right, who can without madness run the
venture? Who in his wits would choose to come within a possibility of
infinite misery; which if he miss, there is yet nothing to be got by
that hazard? Whereas, on the other side, the sober man ventures nothing
against infinite happiness to be got, if his expectation comes not to
pass. If the good man be in the right, he is eternally happy; if he
mistakes, he is not miserable, he feels nothing. On the other side, if
the wicked man be in the right, he is not happy; if he mistakes, he is
infinitely miserable. Must it not be a most manifest wrong judgment
that does not presently see to which side, in this case, the preference
is to be given? I have forborne to mention anything of the certainty or
probability of a future state, designing here to show the wrong
judgment that any one must allow he makes, upon his own principles,
laid how he pleases, who prefers the short pleasures of a vicious life
upon any consideration, whilst he knows, and cannot but be certain,
that a future life is at least possible.

73. Recapitulation—Liberty of indifferency.

To conclude this inquiry into human liberty, which, as it stood before,
I myself from the beginning fearing, and a very judicious friend of
mine, since the publication, suspecting to have some mistake in it,
though he could not particularly show it me, I was put upon a stricter
review of this chapter. Wherein lighting upon a very easy and scarce
observable slip I had made, in putting one seemingly indifferent word
for another that discovery opened to me this present view, which here,
in this second edition, I submit to the learned world, and which, in
short, is this: LIBERTY is a power to act or not to act, according as
the mind directs. A power to direct the operative faculties to motion
or rest in particular instances is that which we call the WILL. That
which in the train of our voluntary actions determines the will to any
change of operation is SOME PRESENT UNEASINESS, which is, or at least
is always accompanied with that of DESIRE. Desire is always moved by
evil, to fly it: because a total freedom from pain always makes a
necessary part of our happiness: but every good, nay, every greater
good, does not constantly move desire, because it may not make, or may
not be taken to make, any necessary part of our happiness. For all that
we desire, is only to be happy. But, though this general desire of
happiness operates constantly and invariably, yet the satisfaction of
any particular desire CAN BE SUSPENDED from determining the will to any
subservient action, till we have maturely examined whether the
particular apparent good which we then desire makes a part of our real
happiness, or be consistent or inconsistent with it. The result of our
judgment upon that examination is what ultimately determines the man;
who could not be FREE if his will were determined by anything but his
own desire, guided by his own judgment.

74. Active and passive power, in motions and in thinking.

True notions concerning the nature and extent of LIBERTY are of so
great importance, that I hope I shall be pardoned this digression,
which my attempt to explain it has led me into. The ideas of will,
volition, liberty, and necessity, in this Chapter of Power, came
naturally in my way. In a former edition of this Treatise I gave an
account of my thoughts concerning them, according to the light I then
had. And now, as a lover of truth, and not a worshipper of my own
doctrines, I own some change of my opinion; which I think I have
discovered ground for. In what I first writ, I with an unbiassed
indifferency followed truth, whither I thought she led me. But neither
being so vain as to fancy infallibility, nor so disingenuous as to
dissemble my mistakes for fear of blemishing my reputation, I have,
with the same sincere design for truth only, not been ashamed to
publish what a severer inquiry has suggested. It is not impossible but
that some may think my former notions right; and some (as I have
already found) these latter; and some neither. I shall not at all
wonder at this variety in men’s opinions: impartial deductions of
reason in controverted points being so rare, and exact ones in abstract
notions not so very easy especially if of any length. And, therefore, I
should think myself not a little beholden to any one, who would, upon
these or any other grounds, fairly clear this subject of LIBERTY from
any difficulties that may yet remain.

75. Summary of our Original ideas.

And thus I have, in a short draught, given a view of OUR ORIGINAL
IDEAS, from whence all the rest are derived, and of which they are made
up; which, if I would consider as a philosopher, and examine on what
causes they depend, and of what they are made, I believe they all might
be reduced to these very few primary and original ones, viz. EXTENSION,
SOLIDITY, MOBILITY, or the power of being moved; which by our senses we
receive from body: PERCEPTIVITY, or the power of perception, or
thinking; MOTIVITY, or the power of moving: which by reflection we
receive from OUR MINDS.

I crave leave to make use of these two new words, to avoid the danger
of being mistaken in the use of those which are equivocal.

To which if we add EXISTENCE, DURATION, NUMBER, which belong both to
the one and the other, we have, perhaps, all the original ideas on
which the rest depend. For by these, I imagine, might be EXPLAINED the
nature of colours, sounds, tastes, smells, and ALL OTHER IDEAS WE HAVE,
if we had but faculties acute enough to perceive the severally modified
extensions and motions of these minute bodies, which produce those
several sensations in us. But my present purpose being only to inquire
into the knowledge the mind has of things, by those ideas and
appearances which God has fitted it to receive from them, and how the
mind comes by that knowledge; rather than into their causes or manner
of Production, I shall not, contrary to the design of this Essay, see
myself to inquire philosophically into the peculiar constitution of
BODIES, and the configuration of parts, whereby THEY have the power to
produce in us the ideas of their sensible qualities. I shall not enter
any further into that disquisition; it sufficing to my purpose to
observe, that gold or saffron has power to produce in us the idea of
yellow, and snow or milk the idea of white, which we can only have by
our sight without examining the texture of the parts of those bodies or
the particular figures or motion of the particles which rebound from
them, to cause in us that particular sensation, though, when we go
beyond the bare ideas in our minds and would inquire into their causes,
we cannot conceive anything else to be in any sensible object, whereby
it produces different ideas in us, but the different bulk, figure,
number, texture, and motion of its insensible parts.




CHAPTER XXII.
OF MIXED MODES.


1. Mixed Modes, what.

Having treated of SIMPLE MODES in the foregoing chapters, and given
several instances of some of the most considerable of them, to show
what they are, and how we come by them; we are now in the next place to
consider those we call MIXED MODES; such are the complex ideas we mark
by the names OBLIGATION, DRUNKENNESS, a LIE, &c.; which consisting of
several combinations of simple ideas of DIFFERENT kinds, I have called
mixed modes, to distinguish them from the more simple modes, which
consist only of simple ideas of the SAME kind. These mixed modes, being
also such combinations of simple ideas as are not looked upon to be
characteristical marks of any real beings that have a steady existence,
but scattered and independent ideas put together by the mind, are
thereby distinguished from the complex ideas of substances.

2. Made by the Mind.

That the mind, in respect of its simple ideas, is wholly passive, and
receives them all from the existence and operations of things, such as
sensation or reflection offers them, without being able to MAKE any one
idea, experience shows us. But if we attentively consider these ideas I
call mixed modes, we are now speaking of, we shall find their origin
quite different. The mind often exercises an ACTIVE power in making
these several combinations. For, it being once furnished with simple
ideas, it can put them together in several compositions, and so make
variety of complex ideas, without examining whether they exist so
together in nature. And hence I think it is that these ideas are called
NOTIONS: as they had their original, and constant existence, more in
the thoughts of men, than in the reality of things; and to form such
ideas, it sufficed that the mind put the parts of them together, and
that they were consistent in the understanding without considering
whether they had any real being: though I do not deny but several of
them might be taken from observation, and the existence of several
simple ideas so combined, as they are put together in the
understanding. For the man who first framed the idea of HYPOCRISY,
might have either taken it at first from the observation of one who
made show of good qualities which he had not; or else have framed that
idea in his mind without having any such pattern to fashion it by. For
it is evident that, in the beginning of languages and societies of men,
several of those complex ideas, which were consequent to the
constitutions established amongst them, must needs have been in the
minds of men before they existed anywhere else; and that many names
that stood for such complex ideas were in use, and so those ideas
framed, before the combinations they stood for ever existed.

3. Sometimes got by the Explication of their Names.

Indeed, now that languages are made, and abound with words standing for
such combinations, an usual way of GETTING these complex ideas is, by
the explication of those terms that stand for them. For, consisting of
a company of simple ideas combined, they may, by words standing for
those simple ideas, be represented to the mind of one who understands
those words, though that complex combination of simple ideas were never
offered to his mind by the real existence of things. Thus a man may
come to have the idea of SACRILEGE or MURDER, by enumerating to him the
simple ideas which these words stand for; without ever seeing either of
them committed.

4. The Name ties the Parts of mixed Modes into one Idea.

Every mixed mode consisting of many distinct simple ideas, it seems
reasonable to inquire, Whence it has its unity; and how such a precise
multitude comes to make but one idea; since that combination does not
always exist together in nature? To which I answer, it is plain it has
its unity from an act of the mind, combining those several simple ideas
together, and considering them as one complex one, consisting of those
parts; and the mark of this union, or that which is looked on generally
to complete it, is one NAME given to that combination. For it is by
their names that men commonly regulate their account of their distinct
species of mixed modes, seldom allowing or considering any number of
simple ideas to make one complex one, but such collections as there be
names for. Thus, though the killing of an old man be as fit in nature
to be united into one complex idea, as the killing a man’s father; yet,
there being no name standing precisely for the one, as there is the
name of PARRICIDE to mark the other, it is not taken for a particular
complex idea, nor a distinct species of actions from that of killing a
young man, or any other man.

5. The Cause of making mixed Modes.

If we should inquire a little further, to see what it is that occasions
men to make several combinations of simple ideas into distinct, and, as
it were, settled modes, and neglect others, which in the nature of
things themselves, have as much an aptness to be combined and make
distinct ideas, we shall find the reason of it to be the end of
language; which being to mark, or communicate men’s thoughts to one
another with all the dispatch that may be, they usually make SUCH
collections of ideas into complex modes, and affix names to them, as
they have frequent use of in their way of living and conversation,
leaving others which they have but seldom an occasion to mention, loose
and without names that tie them together: they rather choosing to
enumerate (when they have need) such ideas as make them up, by the
particular names that stand for them, than to trouble their memories by
multiplying of complex ideas with names to them, which they seldom or
never have any occasion to make use of.

6. Why Words in one Language have none answering in another.

This shows us how it comes to pass that there are in every language
many particular words which cannot be rendered by any one single word
of another. For the several fashions, customs, and manners of one
nation, making several combinations of ideas familiar and necessary in
one, which another people have had never an occasion to make, or
perhaps so much as take notice of, names come of course to be annexed
to them, to avoid long periphrases in things of daily conversation; and
so they become so many distinct complex ideas in their minds. Thus
ostrakismos amongst the Greeks, and proscriptio amongst the Romans,
were words which other languages had no names that exactly answered;
because they stood for complex ideas which were not in the minds of the
men of other nations. Where there was no such custom, there was no
notion of any such actions; no use of such combinations of ideas as
were united, and, as it were, tied together, by those terms: and
therefore in other countries there were no names for them.

7. And Languages change.

Hence also we may see the reason, why languages constantly change, take
up new and lay by old terms. Because change of customs and opinions
bringing with it new combinations of ideas, which it is necessary
frequently to think on and talk about, new names, to avoid long
descriptions, are annexed to them; and so they become new species of
complex modes. What a number of different ideas are by this means
wrapped up in one short sound, and how much of our time and breath is
thereby saved, any one will see, who will but take the pains to
enumerate all the ideas that either REPRIEVE or APPEAL stand for; and
instead of either of those names, use a periphrasis, to make any one
understand their meaning.

8. Mixed Modes

Though I shall have occasion to consider this more at-large when I come
to treat of Words and their use, yet I could not avoid to take thus
much notice here of the NAMES OF MIXED MODES; which being fleeting and
transient combinations of simple ideas, which have but a short
existence anywhere but in the minds of men, and there too have no
longer any existence than whilst they are thought on, have not so much
anywhere the appearance of a constant and lasting existence as in their
names: which are therefore, in this sort of ideas, very apt to be taken
for the ideas themselves. For, if we should inquire where the idea of a
TRIUMPH or APOTHEOSIS exists, it is evident they could neither of them
exist altogether anywhere in the things themselves, being actions that
required time to their performance, and so could never all exist
together; and as to the minds of men, where the ideas of these actions
are supposed to be lodged, they have there too a very uncertain
existence: and therefore we are apt to annex them to the names that
excite them in us.

9. How we get the Ideas of mixed Modes.

There are therefore three ways whereby we get these complex ideas of
mixed modes:—(1) By experience and OBSERVATION of things themselves:
thus, by seeing two men mixed wrestle or fence, we get the idea of
wrestling or fencing. (2) By INVENTION, or voluntary putting together
of several simple ideas in our own minds: so he that first invented
printing or etching, had an idea of it in his mind before it ever
existed. (3) Which is the most usual way, by EXPLAINING THE NAMES of
actions we never saw, or motions we cannot see; and by enumerating, and
thereby, as it were, setting before our imaginations all those ideas
which go to the making them up, and are the constituent parts of them.
For, having by sensation and reflection stored our minds with simple
ideas, and by use got the names that stand for them, we can by those
means represent to another any complex idea we would have him conceive;
so that it has in it no simple ideas but what he knows, and has with us
the same name for. For all our complex ideas are ultimately resolvable
into simple ideas, of which they are compounded and originally made up,
though perhaps their immediate ingredients, as I may so say, are also
complex ideas. Thus, the mixed mode which the word LIE stands for is
made of these simple ideas:—(1) Articulate sounds. (2) Certain ideas in
the mind of the speaker. (3) Those words the signs of those ideas. (4)
Those signs put together, by affirmation or negation, otherwise than
the ideas they stand for are in the mind of the speaker. I think I need
not go any further in the analysis of that complex idea we call a lie:
what I have said is enough to show that it is made up of simple ideas.
And it could not be but an offensive tediousness to my reader, to
trouble him with a more minute enumeration of every particular simple
idea that goes to this complex one; which, from what has been said, he
cannot but be able to make out to himself. The same may be done in all
our complex ideas whatsoever; which, however compounded and
decompounded, may at last be resolved into simple ideas, which are all
the materials of knowledge or thought we have, or can have. Nor shall
we have reason to fear that the mind is hereby stinted to too scanty a
number of ideas, if we consider what an inexhaustible stock of simple
modes number and figure alone afford us. How far then mixed modes,
which admit of the various combinations of different simple ideas, and
their infinite modes, are from being few and scanty, we may easily
imagine. So that, before we have done, we shall see that nobody need be
afraid he shall not have scope and compass enough for his thoughts to
range in, though they be, as I pretend, confined only to simple ideas,
received from sensation or reflection, and their several combinations.

10. Motion, Thinking, and Power have been most modified.

It is worth our observing, which of all our simple ideas have been MOST
modified, and had most mixed ideas made out of them, with names given
to them. And those have been these three:—THINKING and MOTION (which
are the two ideas which comprehend in them all action,) and POWER, from
whence these actions are conceived to flow. These simple ideas, I say,
of thinking, motion, and power, have been those which have been most
modified; and out of whose modifications have been made most complex
modes, with names to them. For ACTION being the great business of
mankind, and the whole matter about which all laws are conversant, it
is no wonder that the several modes of thinking and motion should be
taken notice of, the ideas of them observed, and laid up in the memory,
and have names assigned to them; without which laws could be but ill
made, or vice and disorders repressed. Nor could any communication be
well had amongst men without such complex ideas, with names to them:
and therefore men have settled names, and supposed settled ideas in
their minds, of modes of actions, distinguished by their causes, means,
objects, ends, instruments, time, place, and other circumstances; and
also of their powers fitted for those actions: v.g. BOLDNESS is the
power to speak or do what we intend, before others, without fear or
disorder; and the Greeks call the confidence of speaking by a peculiar
name, [word in Greek]: which power or ability in man of doing anything,
when it has been acquired by frequent doing the same thing, is that
idea we name HABIT; when it is forward, and ready upon every occasion
to break into action, we call it DISPOSITION. Thus, TESTINESS is a
disposition or aptness to be angry.

To conclude: Let us examine any modes of action, v.g. CONSIDERATION and
ASSENT, which are actions of the mind; RUNNING and SPEAKING, which are
actions of the body; REVENGE and MURDER, which are actions of both
together, and we shall find them but so many collections of simple
ideas, which, together, make up the complex ones signified by those
names.

11. Several Words seeming to signify Action, signify but the effect.

POWER being the source from whence all action proceeds, the substances
wherein these powers are, when they *[lost line??] exert this power
into act, are called CAUSES, and the substances which thereupon are
produced, or the simple ideas which are introduced into any subject by
the exerting of that power, are called EFFECTS. The EFFICACY whereby
the new substance or idea is produced is called, in the subject
exerting that power, ACTION; but in the subject wherein any simple idea
is changed or produced, it is called PASSION: which efficacy, however
various, and the effects almost infinite, yet we can, I think, conceive
it, in intellectual agents, to be nothing else but modes of thinking
and willing; in corporeal agents, nothing else but modifications of
motion. I say I think we cannot conceive it to be any other but these
two. For whatever sort of action besides these produces any effects, I
confess myself to have no notion nor idea of; and so it is quite remote
from my thoughts, apprehensions, and knowledge; and as much in the dark
to me as five other senses, or as the ideas of colours to a blind man.
And therefore many words which seem to express some action, signify
nothing of the action or MODUS OPERANDI at all, but barely the effect,
with some circumstances of the subject wrought on, or cause operating:
v.g. CREATION, ANNIHILATION, contain in them no idea of the action or
manner whereby they are produced, but barely of the cause, and the
thing done. And when a countryman says the cold freezes water, though
the word freezing seems to import some action, yet truly it signifies
nothing but the effect, viz. that water that was before fluid is become
hard and consistent, without containing any idea of the action whereby
it is done.

12. Mixed Modes made also of other Ideas than those of Power and
Action.

I think I shall not need to remark here that, though power and action
make the greatest part of mixed modes, marked by names, and familiar in
the minds and mouths of men, yet other simple ideas, and their several
combinations, are not excluded: much less, I think, will it be
necessary for me to enumerate all the mixed modes which have been
settled, with names to them. That would be to make a dictionary of the
greatest part of the words made use of in divinity, ethics, law, and
politics, and several other sciences. All that is requisite to my
present design, is to show what sort of ideas those are which I call
mixed modes; how the mind comes by them; and that they are compositions
made up of simple ideas got from sensation and reflection; which I
suppose I have done.




CHAPTER XXIII.
OF OUR COMPLEX IDEAS OF SUBSTANCES.


The mind being, as I have declared, furnished with a great number of
the simple ideas, conveyed in by the senses as they are found in
exterior things, or by reflection on its own operations, takes notice
also that a certain number of these simple ideas go constantly
together; which being presumed to belong to one thing, and words being
suited to common apprehensions, and made use of for quick dispatch are
called, so united in one subject, by one name; which, by inadvertency,
we are apt afterward to talk of and consider as one simple idea, which
indeed is a complication of many ideas together: because, as I have
said, not imagining how these simple ideas CAN subsist by themselves,
we accustom ourselves to suppose some SUBSTRATUM wherein they do
subsist, and from which they do result, which therefore we call
SUBSTANCE.

2. Our obscure Idea of Substance in general.

So that if any one will examine himself concerning his notion of pure
substance in general, he will find he has no other idea of it at all,
but only a supposition of he knows not what SUPPORT of such qualities
which are capable of producing simple ideas in us; which qualities are
commonly called accidents. If any one should be asked, what is the
subject wherein colour or weight inheres, he would have nothing to say,
but the solid extended parts; and if he were demanded, what is it that
solidity and extension adhere in, he would not be in a much better case
than the Indian before mentioned who, saying that the world was
supported by a great elephant, was asked what the elephant rested on;
to which his answer was—a great tortoise: but being again pressed to
know what gave support to the broad-backed tortoise, replied—SOMETHING,
HE KNEW NOT WHAT. And thus here, as in all other cases where we use
words without having clear and distinct ideas, we talk like children:
who, being questioned what such a thing is, which they know not,
readily give this satisfactory answer, that it is SOMETHING: which in
truth signifies no more, when so used, either by children or men, but
that they know not what; and that the thing they pretend to know, and
talk of, is what they have no distinct idea of at all, and so are
perfectly ignorant of it, and in the dark. The idea then we have, to
which we give the GENERAL name substance, being nothing but the
supposed, but unknown, support of those qualities we find existing,
which we imagine cannot subsist SINE RE SUBSTANTE, without something to
support them, we call that support SUBSTANTIA; which, according to the
true import of the word, is, in plain English, standing under or
upholding.

3. Of the Sorts of Substances.

An obscure and relative idea of SUBSTANCE IN GENERAL being thus made we
come to have the ideas of PARTICULAR SORTS OF SUBSTANCES, by collecting
SUCH combinations of simple ideas as are, by experience and observation
of men’s senses, taken notice of to exist together; and are therefore
supposed to flow from the particular internal constitution, or unknown
essence of that substance. Thus we come to have the ideas of a man,
horse, gold, water, &c.; of which substances, whether any one has any
other CLEAR idea, further than of certain simple ideas co-existent
together, I appeal to every one’s own experience. It is the ordinary
qualities observable in iron, or a diamond, put together, that make the
true complex idea of those substances, which a smith or a jeweller
commonly knows better than a philosopher; who, whatever SUBSTANTIAL
FORMS he may talk of, has no other idea of those substances, than what
is framed by a collection of those simple ideas which are to be found
in them: only we must take notice, that our complex ideas of
substances, besides all those simple ideas they are made up of, have
always the confused idea of something to which they belong, and in
which they subsist: and therefore when we speak of any sort of
substance, we say it is a thing having such or such qualities; as body
is a thing that is extended, figured, and capable of motion; spirit, a
thing capable of thinking; and so hardness, friability, and power to
draw iron, we say, are qualities to be found in a loadstone. These, and
the like fashions of speaking, intimate that the substance is supposed
always SOMETHING BESIDES the extension, figure, solidity, motion,
thinking, or other observable ideas, though we know not what it is.

4. No clear or distinct idea of Substance in general.

Hence, when we talk or think of any particular sort of corporeal
substances, as horse, stone, &c., though the idea we have of either of
them be but the complication or collection of those several simple
ideas of sensible qualities, which we used to find united in the thing
called horse or stone; yet, BECAUSE WE CANNOT CONCEIVE HOW THEY SHOULD
SUBSIST ALONE, NOR ONE IN ANOTHER, we suppose them existing in and
supported by some common subject; which support we denote by the name
substance, though it be certain we have no clear or distinct idea of
that thing we suppose a support.

5. As clear an Idea of spiritual substance as of corporeal substance.

The same happens concerning the operations of the mind, viz. thinking,
reasoning, fearing, &c., which we concluding not to subsist of
themselves, nor apprehending how they can belong to body, or be
produced by it, we are apt to think these the actions of some other
SUBSTANCE, which we call SPIRIT; whereby yet it is evident that, having
no other idea or notion of matter, but something wherein those many
sensible qualities which affect our senses do subsist; by supposing a
substance wherein thinking, knowing, doubting, and a power of moving,
&c., do subsist, we have as clear a notion of the substance of spirit,
as we have of body; the one being supposed to be (without knowing what
it is) the SUBSTRATUM to those simple ideas we have from without; and
the other supposed (with a like ignorance of what it is) to be the
SUBSTRATUM to those operations we experiment in ourselves within. It is
plain then, that the idea of CORPOREAL SUBSTANCE in matter is as remote
from our conceptions and apprehensions, as that of SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE,
or spirit: and therefore, from our not having any notion of the
substance of spirit, we can no more conclude its non-existence, than we
can, for the same reason, deny the existence of body; it being as
rational to affirm there is no body, because we have no clear and
distinct idea of the substance of matter, as to say there is no spirit,
because we have no clear and distinct idea of the substance of a
spirit.

6. Our ideas of particular Sorts of Substances.

Whatever therefore be the secret abstract nature of substance in
general, all the ideas we have of particular distinct sorts of
substances are nothing but several combinations of simple ideas,
co-existing in such, though unknown, cause of their union, as makes the
whole subsist of itself. It is by such combinations of simple ideas,
and nothing else, that we represent particular sorts of substances to
ourselves; such are the ideas we have of their several species in our
minds; and such only do we, by their specific names, signify to others,
v.g. man, horse, sun, water, iron: upon hearing which words, every one
who understands the language, frames in his mind a combination of those
several simple ideas which he has usually observed, or fancied to exist
together under that denomination; all which he supposes to rest in and
be, as it were, adherent to that unknown common subject, which inheres
not in anything else. Though, in the meantime, it be manifest, and
every one, upon inquiry into his own thoughts, will find, that he has
no other idea of any substance, v.g. let it be gold, horse, iron, man,
vitriol, bread, but what he has barely of those sensible qualities,
which he supposes to inhere; with a supposition of such a substratum as
gives, as it were, a support to those qualities or simple ideas, which
he has observed to exist united together. Thus, the idea of the
sun,—what is it but an aggregate of those several simple ideas, bright,
hot, roundish, having a constant regular motion, at a certain distance
from us, and perhaps some other: as he who thinks and discourses of the
sun has been more or less accurate in observing those sensible
qualities, ideas, or properties, which are in that thing which he calls
the sun.

7. Their active and passive Powers a great part of our complex Ideas of
Substances.

For he has the perfectest idea of any of the particular sorts of
substances, who has gathered, and put together, most of those simple
ideas which do exist in it; among which are to be reckoned its active
powers, and passive capacities, which, though not simple ideas, yet in
this respect, for brevity’s sake, may conveniently enough be reckoned
amongst them. Thus, the power of drawing iron is one of the ideas of
the complex one of that substance we call a loadstone; and a power to
be so drawn is a part of the complex one we call iron: which powers
pass for inherent qualities in those subjects. Because every substance,
being as apt, by the powers we observe in it, to change some sensible
qualities in other subjects, as it is to produce in us those simple
ideas which we receive immediately from it, does, by those new sensible
qualities introduced into other subjects, discover to us those powers
which do thereby mediately affect our senses, as regularly as its
sensible qualities do it immediately: v. g. we immediately by our
senses perceive in fire its heat and colour; which are, if rightly
considered, nothing but powers in it to produce those ideas in US: we
also by our senses perceive the colour and brittleness of charcoal,
whereby we come by the knowledge of another power in fire, which it has
to change the colour and consistency of WOOD. By the former, fire
immediately, by the latter, it mediately discovers to us these several
powers; which therefore we look upon to be a part of the qualities of
fire, and so make them a part of the complex idea of it. For all those
powers that we take cognizance of, terminating only in the alteration
of some sensible qualities in those subjects on which they operate, and
so making them exhibit to us new sensible ideas, therefore it is that I
have reckoned these powers amongst the simple ideas which make the
complex ones of the sorts of substances; though these powers considered
in themselves, are truly complex ideas. And in this looser sense I
crave leave to be understood, when I name any of these POTENTIALITIES
among the simple ideas which we recollect in our minds when we think of
PARTICULAR SUBSTANCES. For the powers that are severally in them are
necessary to be considered, if we will have true distinct notions of
the several sorts of substances.

8. And why.

Nor are we to wonder that powers make a great part of our complex ideas
of substances; since their secondary qualities are those which in most
of them serve principally to distinguish substances one from another,
and commonly make a considerable part of the complex idea of the
several sorts of them. For, our senses failing us in the discovery of
the bulk, texture, and figure of the minute parts of bodies, on which
their real constitutions and differences depend, we are fain to make
use of their secondary qualities as the characteristical notes and
marks whereby to frame ideas of them in our minds, and distinguish them
one from another: all which secondary qualities, as has been shown, are
nothing but bare powers. For the colour and taste of opium are, as well
as its soporific or anodyne virtues, mere powers, depending on its
primary qualities, whereby it is fitted to produce different operations
on different parts of our bodies.

9. Three sorts of Ideas make our complex ones of Corporeal Substances.

The ideas that make our complex ones of corporeal substances, are of
these three sorts. First, the ideas of the primary qualities of things,
which are discovered by our senses, and are in them even when we
perceive them not; such are the bulk, figure, number, situation, and
motion of the parts of bodies; which are really in them, whether we
take notice of them or not. Secondly, the sensible secondary qualities,
which, depending on these, are nothing but the powers those substances
have to produce several ideas in us by our senses; which ideas are not
in the things themselves, otherwise than as anything is in its cause.
Thirdly, the aptness we consider in any substance, to give or receive
such alterations of primary qualities, as that the substance so altered
should produce in us different ideas from what it did before; these are
called active and passive powers: all which powers, as far as we have
any notice or notion of them, terminate only in sensible simple ideas.
For whatever alteration a loadstone has the power to make in the minute
particles of iron, we should have no notion of any power it had at all
to operate on iron, did not its sensible motion discover it: and I
doubt not, but there are a thousand changes, that bodies we daily
handle have a power to cause in one another, which we never suspect,
because they never appear in sensible effects.

10. Powers thus make a great Part of our complex Ideas of particular
Substances.

POWERS therefore justly make a great part of our complex ideas of
substances. He that will examine his complex idea of gold, will find
several of its ideas that make it up to be only powers; as the power of
being melted, but of not spending itself in the fire; of being
dissolved in AQUA REGIA, are ideas as necessary to make up our complex
idea of gold, as its colour and weight: which, if duly considered, are
also nothing but different powers. For, to speak truly, yellowness is
not actually in gold, but is a power in gold to produce that idea in us
by our eyes, when placed in a due light: and the heat, which we cannot
leave out of our ideas of the sun, is no more really in the sun, than
the white colour it introduces into wax. These are both equally powers
in the sun, operating, by the motion and figure of its sensible parts,
so on a man, as to make him have the idea of heat; and so on wax, as to
make it capable to produce in a man the idea of white.

11. The now secondary Qualities of Bodies would disappear, if we could
discover the primary ones of their minute Parts.

Had we senses acute enough to discern the minute particles of bodies,
and the real constitution on which their sensible qualities depend, I
doubt not but they would produce quite different ideas in us: and that
which is now the yellow colour of gold, would then disappear, and
instead of it we should see an admirable texture of parts, of a certain
size and figure. This microscopes plainly discover to us; for what to
our naked eyes produces a certain colour, is, by thus augmenting the
acuteness of our senses, discovered to be quite a different thing; and
the thus altering, as it were, the proportion of the bulk of the minute
parts of a coloured object to our usual sight, produces different ideas
from what it did before. Thus, sand or pounded glass, which is opaque,
and white to the naked eye, is pellucid in a microscope; and a hair
seen in this way, loses its former colour, and is, in a great measure,
pellucid, with a mixture of some bright sparkling colours, such as
appear from the refraction of diamonds, and other pellucid bodies.
Blood, to the naked eye, appears all red; but by a good microscope,
wherein its lesser parts appear, shows only some few globules of red,
swimming in a pellucid liquor, and how these red globules would appear,
if glasses could be found that could yet magnify them a thousand or ten
thousand times more, is uncertain.

12. Our Faculties for Discovery of the Qualities and powers of
Substances suited to our State.

The infinite wise Contriver of us, and all things about us, hath fitted
our senses, faculties, and organs, to the conveniences of life, and the
business we have to do here. We are able, by our senses, to know and
distinguish things: and to examine them so far as to apply them to our
uses, and several ways to accommodate the exigences of this life. We
have insight enough into their admirable contrivances and wonderful
effects, to admire and magnify the wisdom, power and goodness of their
Author. Such a knowledge as this which is suited to our present
condition, we want not faculties to attain. But it appears not that God
intended we should have a perfect, clear, and adequate knowledge of
them: that perhaps is not in the comprehension of any finite being. We
are furnished with faculties (dull and weak as they are) to discover
enough in the creatures to lead us to the knowledge of the Creator, and
the knowledge of our duty; and we are fitted well enough with abilities
to provide for the conveniences of living: these are our business in
this world. But were our senses altered, and made much quicker and
acuter, the appearance and outward scheme of things would have quite
another face to us; and, I am apt to think, would be inconsistent with
our being, or at least wellbeing, in the part of the universe which we
inhabit. He that considers how little our constitution is able to bear
a remove into part of this air, not much higher than that we commonly
breathe in, will have reason to be satisfied, that in this globe of
earth allotted for our mansion, the all-wise Architect has suited our
organs, and the bodies that are to affect them, one to another. If our
sense of hearing were but a thousand times quicker than it is, how
would a perpetual noise distract us. And we should in the quietest
retirement be less able to sleep or meditate than in the middle of a
sea-fight. Nay, if that most instructive of our senses, seeing, were in
any man a thousand or a hundred thousand times more acute than it is by
the best microscope, things several millions of times less than the
smallest object of his sight now would then be visible to his naked
eyes, and so he would come nearer to the discovery of the texture and
motion of the minute parts of corporeal things; and in many of them,
probably get ideas of their internal constitutions: but then he would
be in a quite different world from other people: nothing would appear
the same to him and others: the visible ideas of everything would be
different. So that I doubt, whether he and the rest of men could
discourse concerning the objects of sight, or have any communication
about colours, their appearances being so wholly different. And perhaps
such a quickness and tenderness of sight could not endure bright
sunshine, or so much as open daylight; nor take in but a very small
part of any object at once, and that too only at a very near distance.
And if by the help of such MICROSCOPICAL EYES (if I may so call them) a
man could penetrate further than ordinary into the secret composition
and radical texture of bodies, he would not make any great advantage by
the change, if such an acute sight would not serve to conduct him to
the market and exchange; if he could not see things he was to avoid, at
a convenient distance; nor distinguish things he had to do with by
those sensible qualities others do. He that was sharp-sighted enough to
see the configuration of the minute particles of the spring of a clock,
and observe upon what peculiar structure and impulse its elastic motion
depends, would no doubt discover something very admirable: but if eyes
so framed could not view at once the hand, and the characters of the
hour-plate, and thereby at a distance see what o’clock it was, their
owner could not be much benefited by that acuteness; which, whilst it
discovered the secret contrivance of the parts of the machine, made him
lose its use.

13. Conjecture about the corporeal organs of some Spirits.

And here give me leave to propose an extravagant conjecture of mine,
viz. That since we have some reason (if there be any credit to be given
to the report of things that our philosophy cannot account for) to
imagine, that Spirits can assume to themselves bodies of different
bulk, figure, and conformation of parts—whether one great advantage
some of them have over us may not lie in this, that they can so frame
and shape to themselves organs of sensation or perception, as to suit
them to their present design, and the circumstances of the object they
would consider. For how much would that man exceed all others in
knowledge, who had but the faculty so to alter the structure of his
eyes, that one sense, as to make it capable of all the several degrees
of vision which the assistance of glasses (casually at first lighted
on) has taught us to conceive? What wonders would he discover, who
could so fit his eyes to all sorts of objects, as to see when he
pleased the figure and motion of the minute particles in the blood, and
other juices of animals, as distinctly as he does, at other times, the
shape and motion of the animals themselves? But to us, in our present
state, unalterable organs, so contrived as to discover the figure and
motion of the minute parts of bodies, whereon depend those sensible
qualities we now observe in them, would perhaps be of no advantage. God
has no doubt made them so as is best for us in our present condition.
He hath fitted us for the neighbourhood of the bodies that surround us,
and we have to do with; and though we cannot, by the faculties we have,
attain to a perfect knowledge of things, yet they will serve us well
enough for those ends above-mentioned, which are our great concernment.
I beg my reader’s pardon for laying before him so wild a fancy
concerning the ways of perception of beings above us; but how
extravagant soever it be, I doubt whether we can imagine anything about
the knowledge of angels but after this manner, some way or other in
proportion to what we find and observe in ourselves. And though we
cannot but allow that the infinite power and wisdom of God may frame
creatures with a thousand other faculties and ways of perceiving things
without them than what we have, yet our thoughts can go no further than
our own: so impossible it is for us to enlarge our very guesses beyond
the ideas received from our own sensation and reflection. The
supposition, at least, that angels do sometimes assume bodies, needs
not startle us; since some of the most ancient and most learned Fathers
of the church seemed to believe that they had bodies: and this is
certain, that their state and way of existence is unknown to us.

14. Our specific Ideas of Substances.

But to return to the matter in hand,—the ideas we have of substances,
and the ways we come by them. I say, our SPECIFIC ideas of substances
are nothing else but A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN NUMBER OF SIMPLE IDEAS,
CONSIDERED AS UNITED IN ONE THING. These ideas of substances, though
they are commonly simple apprehensions, and the names of them simple
terms, yet in effect are complex and compounded. Thus the idea which an
Englishman signifies by the name swan, is white colour, long neck, red
beak, black legs, and whole feet, and all these of a certain size, with
a power of swimming in the water, and making a certain kind of noise,
and perhaps, to a man who has long observed this kind of birds, some
other properties: which all terminate in sensible simple ideas, all
united in one common subject.

15. Our Ideas of spiritual Substances, as clear as of bodily
Substances.

Besides the complex ideas we have of material sensible substances, of
which I have last spoken,—by the simple ideas we have taken from those
operations of our own minds, which we experiment daily in ourselves, as
thinking, understanding, willing, knowing, and power of beginning
motion, &c., co-existing in some substance, we are able to frame the
COMPLEX IDEA OF AN IMMATERIAL SPIRIT. And thus, by putting together the
ideas of thinking, perceiving, liberty, and power of moving themselves
and other things, we have as clear a perception and notion of
immaterial substances as we have of material. For putting together the
ideas of thinking and willing, or the power of moving or quieting
corporeal motion, joined to substance, of which we have no distinct
idea, we have the idea of an immaterial spirit; and by putting together
the ideas of coherent solid parts, and a power of being moved joined
with substance, of which likewise we have no positive idea, we have the
idea of matter. The one is as clear and distinct an idea as the other:
the idea of thinking, and moving a body, being as clear and distinct
ideas as the ideas of extension, solidity, and being moved. For our
idea of substance is equally obscure, or none at all, in both: it is
but a supposed I know not what, to support those ideas we call
accidents. It is for want of reflection that we are apt to think that
our senses show us nothing but material things. Every act of sensation,
when duly considered, gives us an equal view of both parts of nature,
the corporeal and spiritual. For whilst I know, by seeing or hearing,
&c., that there is some corporeal being without me, the object of that
sensation, I do more certainly know, that there is some spiritual being
within me that sees and hears. This, I must be convinced, cannot be the
action of bare insensible matter; nor ever could be, without an
immaterial thinking being.

16. No Idea of abstract Substance either in Body or Spirit.

By the complex idea of extended, figured, coloured, and all other
sensible qualities, which is all that we know of it, we are as far from
the idea of the substance of body, as if we knew nothing at all: nor
after all the acquaintance and familiarity which we imagine we have
with matter, and the many qualities men assure themselves they perceive
and know in bodies, will it perhaps upon examination be found, that
they have any more or clearer primary ideas belonging to body, than
they have belonging to immaterial spirit.

17. Cohesion of solid parts and Impulse, the primary ideas peculiar to
Body.

The primary ideas we have PECULIAR TO BODY, as contradistinguished to
spirit, are the COHESION OF SOLID, AND CONSEQUENTLY SEPARABLE, PARTS,
and a POWER OF COMMUNICATING MOTION BY IMPULSE. These, I think, are the
original ideas proper and peculiar to body; for figure is but the
consequence of finite extension.

18. Thinking and Motivity

The ideas we have belonging and PECULIAR TO SPIRIT, are THINKING, and
WILL, or A POWER OF PUTTING BODY INTO MOTION BY THOUGHT, AND, WHICH IS
CONSEQUENT TO IT, LIBERTY. For, as body cannot but communicate its
motion by impulse to another body, which it meets with at rest, so the
mind can put bodies into motion, or forbear to do so, as it pleases.
The ideas of EXISTENCE, DURATION, and MOBILITY, are common to them
both.

19. Spirits capable of Motion.

There is no reason why it should be thought strange that I make
mobility belong to spirit; for having no other idea of motion, but
change of distance with other beings that are considered as at rest;
and finding that spirits, as well as bodies, cannot operate but where
they are; and that spirits do operate at several times in several
places, I cannot but attribute change of place to all finite spirits:
(for of the Infinite Spirit I speak not here). For my soul, being a
real being as well as my body, is certainly as capable of changing
distance with any other body, or being, as body itself; and so is
capable of motion. And if a mathematician can consider a certain
distance, or a change of that distance between two points, one may
certainly conceive a distance and a change of distance, between two
spirits; and so conceive their motion, their approach or removal, one
from another.

20. Proof of this.

Every one finds in himself that his soul can think, will, and operate
on his body in the place where that is, but cannot operate on a body,
or in a place, an hundred miles distant from it. Nobody can imagine
that his soul can think or move a body at Oxford, whilst he is at
London; and cannot but know, that, being united to his body, it
constantly changes place all the whole journey between Oxford and
London, as the coach or horse does that carries him, and I think may be
said to be truly all that while in motion or if that will not be
allowed to afford us a clear idea enough of its motion, its being
separated from the body in death, I think, will; for to consider it as
going out of the body, or leaving it, and yet to have no idea of its
motion, seems to me impossible.

21. God immoveable because infinite.

If it be said by any one that it cannot change place, because it hath
none, for the spirits are not IN LOCO, but UBI; I suppose that way of
talking will not now be of much weight to many, in an age that is not
much disposed to admire, or suffer themselves to be deceived by such
unintelligible ways of speaking. But if any one thinks there is any
sense in that distinction, and that it is applicable to our present
purpose, I desire him to put it into intelligible English; and then
from thence draw a reason to show that immaterial spirits are not
capable of motion. Indeed motion cannot be attributed to God; not
because he is an immaterial, but because he is an infinite spirit.

22. Our complex idea of an immaterial Spirit and our complex idea of
Body compared.

Let us compare, then, our complex idea of an immaterial spirit with our
complex idea of body, and see whether there be any more obscurity in
one than in the other, and in which most. Our idea of BODY, as I think,
is AN EXTENDED SOLID SUBSTANCE, CAPABLE OF COMMUNICATING MOTION BY
IMPULSE: and our idea of SOUL, AS AN IMMATERIAL SPIRIT, is of A
SUBSTANCE THAT THINKS, AND HAS A POWER OF EXCITING MOTION IN BODY, BY
WILLING, OR THOUGHT. These, I think, are our complex ideas of soul and
body, as contradistinguished; and now let us examine which has most
obscurity in it, and difficulty to be apprehended. I know that people
whose thoughts are immersed in matter, and have so subjected their
minds to their senses that they seldom reflect on anything beyond them,
are apt to say, they cannot comprehend a THINKING thing which perhaps
is true: but I affirm, when they consider it well, they can no more
comprehend an EXTENDED thing.

23. Cohesion of solid Parts in Body as hard to be conceived as thinking
in a Soul.

If any one says he knows not what it is thinks in him, he means he
knows not what the substance is of that thinking thing: No more, say I,
knows he what the substance is of that solid thing. Further, if he says
he knows not how he thinks, I answer, Neither knows he how he is
extended, how the solid parts of body are united or cohere together to
make extension. For though the pressure of the particles of air may
account for the cohesion of several parts of matter that are grosser
than the particles of air, and have pores less than the corpuscles of
air, yet the weight or pressure of the air will not explain, nor can be
a cause of the coherence of the particles of air themselves. And if the
pressure of the aether, or any subtiler matter than the air, may unite,
and hold fast together, the parts of a particle of air, as well as
other bodies, yet it cannot make bonds for ITSELF, and hold together
the parts that make up every the least corpuscle of that MATERIA
SUBTILIS. So that that hypothesis, how ingeniously soever explained, by
showing that the parts of sensible bodies are held together by the
pressure of other external insensible bodies, reaches not the parts of
the aether itself; and by how much the more evident it proves, that the
parts of other bodies are held together by the external pressure of the
aether, and can have no other conceivable cause of their cohesion and
union, by so much the more it leaves us in the dark concerning the
cohesion of the parts of the corpuscles of the aether itself: which we
can neither conceive without parts, they being bodies, and divisible,
nor yet how their parts cohere, they wanting that cause of cohesion
which is given of the cohesion of the parts of all other bodies.

24. Not explained by an ambient fluid.

But, in truth, the pressure of any ambient fluid, how great soever, can
be no intelligible cause of the cohesion of the solid parts of matter.
For, though such a pressure may hinder the avulsion of two polished
superficies, one from another, in a line perpendicular to them, as in
the experiment of two polished marbles; yet it can never in the least
hinder the separation by a motion, in a line parallel to those
surfaces. Because the ambient fluid, having a full liberty to succeed
in each point of space, deserted by a lateral motion, resists such a
motion of bodies, so joined, no more than it would resist the motion of
that body were it on all sides environed by that fluid, and touched no
other body; and therefore, if there were no other cause of cohesion,
all parts of bodies must be easily separable by such a lateral sliding
motion. For if the pressure of the aether be the adequate cause of
cohesion, wherever that cause operates not, there can be no cohesion.
And since it cannot operate against a lateral separation, (as has been
shown,) therefore in every imaginary plane, intersecting any mass of
matter, there could be no more cohesion than of two polished surfaces,
which will always, notwithstanding any imaginable pressure of a fluid,
easily slide one from another. So that perhaps, how clear an idea
soever we think we have of the extension of body, which is nothing but
the cohesion of solid parts, he that shall well consider it in his
mind, may have reason to conclude, That it is as easy for him to have a
clear idea how the soul thinks as how body is extended. For, since body
is no further, nor otherwise, extended, than by the union and cohesion
of its solid parts, we shall very ill comprehend the extension of body,
without understanding wherein consists the union and cohesion of its
parts; which seems to me as incomprehensible as the manner of thinking,
and how it is performed.

We can as little understand how the parts cohere in extension as how
our spirits perceive or move.

25. I allow it is usual for most people to wonder how any one should
find a difficulty in what they think they every day observe. Do we not
see (will they be ready to say) the parts of bodies stick firmly
together? Is there anything more common? And what doubt can there be
made of it? And the like, I say, concerning thinking and voluntary
motion. Do we not every moment experiment it in ourselves, and
therefore can it be doubted? The matter of fact is clear, I confess;
but when we would a little nearer look into it, both in the one and the
other; and can as little understand how the parts of body cohere, as
how we ourselves perceive or move. I would have any one intelligibly
explain to me how the parts of gold, or brass, (that but now in fusion
were as loose from one another as the particles of water, or the sands
of an hour-glass,) come in a few moments to be so united, and adhere so
strongly one to another, that the utmost force of men’s arms cannot
separate them? A considering man will, I suppose, be here at a loss to
satisfy his own, or another man’s understanding.

26. The cause of coherence of atoms in extended substances
incomprehensible.

The little bodies that compose that fluid we call water are so
extremely small, that I have never heard of any one who, by a
microscope, (and yet I have heard of some that have magnified to ten
thousand; nay, to much above a hundred thousand times,) pretended to
perceive their distinct bulk, figure, or motion; and the particles of
water are also so perfectly loose one from another, that the least
force sensibly separates them. Nay, if we consider their perpetual
motion, we must allow them to have no cohesion one with another; and
yet let but a sharp cold come, and they unite, they consolidate; these
little atoms cohere, and are not, without great force, separable. He
that could find the bonds that tie these heaps of loose little bodies
together so firmly; he that could make known the cement that makes them
stick so fast one to another, would discover a great and yet unknown
secret: and yet when that was done, would he be far enough from making
the extension of body (which is the cohesion of its solid parts)
intelligible, till he could show wherein consisted the union, or
consolidation of the parts of those bonds or of that cement, or of the
least particle of matter that exists. Whereby it appears that this
primary and supposed obvious quality of body will be found, when
examined, to be as incomprehensible as anything belonging to our minds,
and a solid extended substance as hard to be conceived as a thinking
immaterial one, whatever difficulties some would raise against it.

27. The supposed pressure [*dropped word] explain cohesion is
unintelligible.

For, to extend our thoughts a little further, the pressure which is
brought to explain the cohesion of bodies [*dropped line] considered,
as no doubt it is, finite, let any one send his contemplation to the
extremities of the universe, and there see what conceivable hoops, what
bond he can imagine to hold this mass of matter in so close a pressure
together; from whence steel has its firmness, and the parts of a
diamond their hardness and indissolubility. If matter be finite, it
must have its extremes; and there must be something to hinder it from
scattering asunder. If, to avoid this difficulty, any one will throw
himself into the supposition and abyss of infinite matter, let him
consider what light he thereby brings to the cohesion of body, and
whether he be ever the nearer making it intelligible, by resolving it
into a supposition the most absurd and most incomprehensible of all
other: so far is our extension of body (which is nothing but the
cohesion of solid parts) from being clearer, or more distinct, when we
would inquire into the nature, cause, or manner of it, than the idea of
thinking.

28. Communication of Motion by Impulse, or by Thought, equally
unintelligible.

Another idea we have of body is, THE POWER OF COMMUNICATION OF MOTION
BY IMPULSE; and of our souls, THE POWER OF EXCITING MOTION BY THOUGHT.
These ideas, the one of body, the other of our minds, every day’s
experience clearly furnishes us with: but if here again we inquire how
this is done, we are equally in the dark. For, in the communication of
motion by impulse, wherein as much motion is lost to one body as is got
to the other, which is the ordinariest case, we can have no other
conception, but of the passing of motion out of one body into another;
which, I think, is as obscure and inconceivable as how our minds move
or stop our bodies by thought, which we every moment find they do. The
increase of motion by impulse, which is observed or believed sometimes
to happen, is yet harder to be understood. We have by daily experience
clear evidence of motion produced both by impulse and by thought; but
the manner how, hardly comes within our comprehension: we are equally
at a loss in both. So that, however we consider motion, and its
communication, either from body or spirit, the idea which belongs to
spirit is at least as clear as that which belongs to body. And if we
consider the active power of moving, or, as I may call it, motivity, it
is much clearer in spirit than body; since two bodies, placed by one
another at rest, will never afford us the idea of a power in the one to
move the other, but by a borrowed motion: whereas the mind every day
affords us ideas of an active power of moving of bodies; and therefore
it is worth our consideration, whether active power be not the proper
attribute of spirits, and passive power of matter. Hence may be
conjectured that created spirits are not totally separate from matter,
because they are both active and passive. Pure spirit, viz. God, is
only active; pure matter is only passive; those beings that are both
active and passive, we may judge to partake of both. But be that as it
will, I think, we have as many and as clear ideas belonging to spirit
as we have belonging to body, the substance of each being equally
unknown to us; and the idea of thinking in spirit, as clear as of
extension in body; and the communication of motion by thought, which we
attribute to spirit, is as evident as that by impulse, which we ascribe
to body. Constant experience makes us sensible of both these, though
our narrow understandings can comprehend neither. For, when the mind
would look beyond those original ideas we have from sensation or
reflection, and penetrate into their causes, and manner of production,
we find still it discovers nothing but its own short-sightedness.

29. Summary.

To conclude. Sensation convinces us that there are solid extended
substances; and reflection, that there are thinking ones: experience
assures us of the existence of such beings, and that the one hath a
power to move body by impulse, the other by thought; this we cannot
doubt of. Experience, I say, every moment furnishes us with the clear
ideas both of the one and the other. But beyond these ideas, as
received from their proper sources, our faculties will not reach. If we
would inquire further into their nature, causes, and manner, we
perceive not the nature of extension clearer than we do of thinking. If
we would explain them any further, one is as easy as the other; and
there is no more difficulty to conceive how A SUBSTANCE WE KNOW NOT
should, by thought, set body into motion, than how A SUBSTANCE WE KNOW
NOT should, by impulse, set body into motion. So that we are no more
able to discover wherein the ideas belonging to body consist, than
those belonging to spirit. From whence it seems probable to me, that
the simple ideas we receive from sensation and reflection are the
boundaries of our thoughts; beyond which the mind, whatever efforts it
would make, is not able to advance one jot; nor can it make any
discoveries, when it would pry into the nature and hidden causes of
those ideas.

30. Our idea of Spirit and our idea of Body compared.

So that, in short, the idea we have of spirit, compared with the idea
we have of body, stands thus: the substance of spirits is unknown to
us; and so is the substance of body equally unknown to us. Two primary
qualities or properties of body, viz. solid coherent parts and impulse,
we have distinct clear ideas of: so likewise we know, and have distinct
clear ideas, of two primary qualities or properties of spirit, viz.
thinking, and a power of action; i.e. a power of beginning or stopping
several thoughts or motions. We have also the ideas of several
qualities inherent in bodies, and have the clear distinct ideas of
them; which qualities are but the various modifications of the
extension of cohering solid parts, and their motion. We have likewise
the ideas of the several modes of thinking viz. believing, doubting,
intending, fearing, hoping; all which are but the several modes of
thinking. We have also the ideas of willing, and moving the body
consequent to it, and with the body itself too; for, as has been shown,
spirit is capable of motion.

31. The Notion of Spirit involves no more Difficulty in it than that of
Body.

Lastly, if this notion of immaterial spirit may have, perhaps, some
difficulties in it not easily to be explained, we have therefore no
more reason to deny or doubt the existence of such spirits, than we
have to deny or doubt the existence of body; because the notion of body
is cumbered with some difficulties very hard, and perhaps impossible to
be explained or understood by us. For I would fain have instanced
anything in our notion of spirit more perplexed, or nearer a
contradiction, than the very notion of body includes in it; the
divisibility IN INFINITUM of any finite extension involving us, whether
we grant or deny it, in consequences impossible to be explicated or
made in our apprehensions consistent; consequences that carry greater
difficulty, and more apparent absurdity, than anything can follow from
the notion of an immaterial knowing substance.

32. We know nothing of things beyond our simple Ideas of them.

Which we are not at all to wonder at, since we having but some few
superficial ideas of things, discovered to us only by the senses from
without, or by the mind, reflecting on what it experiments in itself
within, have no knowledge beyond that, much less of the internal
constitution, and true nature of things, being destitute of faculties
to attain it. And therefore experimenting and discovering in ourselves
knowledge, and the power of voluntary motion, as certainly as we
experiment, or discover in things without us, the cohesion and
separation of solid parts, which is the extension and motion of bodies;
we have as much reason to be satisfied with our notion of immaterial
spirit, as with our notion of body, and the existence of the one as
well as the other. For it being no more a contradiction that thinking
should exist separate and independent from solidity, than it is a
contradiction that solidity should exist separate and independent from
thinking, they being both but simple ideas, independent one from
another and having as clear and distinct ideas in us of thinking as of
solidity, I know not why we may not as well allow a thinking thing
without solidity, i.e. immaterial, to exist, as a solid thing without
thinking, i.e. matter, to exist; especially since it is not harder to
conceive how thinking should exist without matter, than how matter
should think. For whensoever we would proceed beyond these simple ideas
we have from sensation and reflection and dive further into the nature
of things, we fall presently into darkness and obscurity, perplexedness
and difficulties, and can discover nothing further but our own
blindness and ignorance. But whichever of these complex ideas be
clearest, that of body, or immaterial spirit, this is evident, that the
simple ideas that make them up are no other than what we have received
from sensation or reflection: and so is it of all our other ideas of
substances, even of God himself.

33. Our complex idea of God.

For if we examine the idea we have of the incomprehensible Supreme
Being, we shall find that we come by it the same way; and that the
complex ideas we have both of God, and separate spirits, are made of
the simple ideas we receive from reflection; v.g. having, from what we
experiment in ourselves, got the ideas of existence and duration; of
knowledge and power; of pleasure and happiness; and of several other
qualities and powers, which it is better to have than to be without;
when we would frame an idea the most suitable we can to the Supreme
Being, we enlarge every one of these with our idea of infinity; and so
putting them together, make our complex idea of God. For that the mind
has such a power of enlarging some of its ideas, received from
sensation and reflection, has been already shown.

34. Our complex idea of God as infinite.

If I find that I know some few things, and some of them, or all,
perhaps imperfectly, I can frame an idea of knowing twice as many;
which I can double again, as often as I can add to number; and thus
enlarge my idea of knowledge, by extending its comprehension to all
things existing, or possible. The same also I can do of knowing them
more perfectly; i.e. all their qualities, powers, causes, consequences,
and relations, &c., till all be perfectly known that is in them, or can
any way relate to them: and thus frame the idea of infinite or
boundless knowledge. The same may also be done of power, till we come
to that we call infinite; and also of the duration of existence,
without beginning or end, and so frame the idea of an eternal being.
The degrees or extent wherein we ascribe existence, power, wisdom, and
all other perfections (which we can have any ideas of) to that
sovereign Being, which we call G-d, being all boundless and infinite,
we frame the best idea of him our minds are capable of: all which is
done, I say, by enlarging those simple ideas we have taken from the
operations of our own minds, by reflection; or by our senses, from
exterior things, to that vastness to which infinity can extend them.

35. God in his own essence incognisable.

For it is infinity, which, joined to our ideas of existence, power,
knowledge, &c., makes that complex idea, whereby we represent to
ourselves, the best we can, the Supreme Being. For, though in his own
essence (which certainly we do not know, not knowing the real essence
of a pebble, or a fly, or of our own selves) God be simple and
uncompounded; yet I think I may say we have no other idea of him, but a
complex one of existence, knowledge, power, happiness, &c., infinite
and eternal: which are all distinct ideas, and some of them, being
relative, are again compounded of others: all which being, as has been
shown, originally got from sensation and reflection, go to make up the
idea or notion we have of God.

36. No Ideas in our complex ideas of Spirits, but those got from
Sensation or Reflection.

This further is to be observed, that there is no idea we attribute to
God, bating infinity, which is not also a part of our complex idea of
other spirits. Because, being capable of no other simple ideas,
belonging to anything but body, but those which by reflection we
receive from the operation of our own minds, we can attribute to
spirits no other but what we receive from thence: and all the
difference we can put between them, in our contemplation of spirits, is
only in the several extents and degrees of their knowledge, power,
duration, happiness, &c. For that in our ideas, as well of spirits as
of other things, we are restrained to THOSE WE RECEIVE FROM SENSATION
AND REFLECTION, is evident from hence,—That, in our ideas of spirits,
how much soever advanced in perfection beyond those of bodies, even to
that of infinite, we cannot yet have any idea of the manner wherein
they discover their thoughts one to another: though we must necessarily
conclude that separate spirits, which are beings that have perfecter
knowledge and greater happiness than we, must needs have also a
perfecter way of communicating their thoughts than we have, who are
fain to make use of corporeal signs, and particular sounds; which are
therefore of most general use, as being the best and quickest we are
capable of. But of immediate communication having no experiment in
ourselves, and consequently no notion of it at all, we have no idea how
spirits, which use not words, can with quickness; or much less how
spirits that have no bodies can be masters of their own thoughts, and
communicate or conceal them at pleasure, though we cannot but
necessarily suppose they have such a power.

37. Recapitulation.

And thus we have seen what kind of ideas we have of SUBSTANCES OF ALL
KINDS, wherein they consist, and how we came by them. From whence, I
think, it is very evident,

First, That all our ideas of the several SORTS of substances are
nothing but collections of simple ideas: with a supposition of
SOMETHING to which they belong, and in which they subsist; though of
this supposed something we have no clear distinct idea at all.

Secondly, That all the simple ideas, that thus united in one common
SUBSTRATUM, make up our complex ideas of several SORTS of substances,
are no other but such as we have received from sensation or reflection.
So that even in those which we think we are most intimately acquainted
with, and that come nearest the comprehension of our most enlarged
conceptions, we cannot go beyond those simple ideas. And even in those
which seem most remote from all we have to do with, and do infinitely
surpass anything we can perceive in ourselves by reflection; or
discover by sensation in other things, we can attain to nothing but
those simple ideas, which we originally received from sensation or
reflection; as is evident in the complex ideas we have of angels, and
particularly of God himself.

Thirdly, That most of the simple ideas that make up our complex ideas
of substances, when truly considered, are only POWERS, however we are
apt to take them for positive qualities; v.g. the greatest part of the
ideas that make our complex idea of GOLD are yellowness, great weight,
ductility, fusibility, and solubility in AQUA REGIA, &c., all united
together in an unknown SUBSTRATUM: all which ideas are nothing else but
so many relations to other substances; and are not really in the gold,
considered barely in itself, though they depend on those real and
primary qualities of its internal constitution, whereby it has a
fitness differently to operate, and be operated on by several other
substances.




CHAPTER XXIV.
OF COLLECTIVE IDEAS OF SUBSTANCES.


1. A collective idea is one Idea.

Besides these complex ideas of several SINGLE substances, as of man,
horse, gold, violet, apple, &c., the mind hath also complex COLLECTIVE
ideas of substances; which I so call, because such ideas are made up of
many particular substances considered together, as united into one
idea, and which so joined; are looked on as one; v. g. the idea of such
a collection of men as make an ARMY, though consisting of a great
number of distinct substances, is as much one idea as the idea of a
man: and the great collective idea of all bodies whatsoever, signified
by the name WORLD, is as much one idea as the idea of any the least
particle of matter in it; it sufficing to the unity of any idea, that
it be considered as one representation or picture, though made up of
ever so many particulars.

2. Made by the Power of composing in the Mind.

These collective ideas of substances the mind makes, by its power of
composition, and uniting severally either simple or complex ideas into
one, as it does, by the same faculty, make the complex ideas of
particular substances, consisting of an aggregate of divers simple
ideas, united in one substance. And as the mind, by putting together
the repeated ideas of unity, makes the collective mode, or complex
idea, of any number, as a score, or a gross, &c.,—so, by putting
together several particular substances, it makes collective ideas of
substances, as a troop, an army, a swarm, a city, a fleet; each of
which every one finds that he represents to his own mind by one idea,
in one view; and so under that notion considers those several things as
perfectly one, as one ship, or one atom. Nor is it harder to conceive
how an army of ten thousand men should make one idea than how a man
should make one idea; it being as easy to the mind to unite into one
the idea of a great number of men, and consider it as one as it is to
unite into one particular all the distinct ideas that make up the
composition of a man, and consider them all together as one.

3. Artificial things that are made up of distinct substances are our
collective Ideas.

Amongst such kind of collective ideas are to be counted most part of
artificial things, at least such of them as are made up of distinct
substances: and, in truth, if we consider all these collective ideas
aright, as ARMY, CONSTELLATION, UNIVERSE, as they are united into so
many single ideas, they are but the artificial draughts of the mind;
bringing things very remote, and independent on one another, into one
view, the better to contemplate and discourse on them, united into one
conception, and signified by one name. For there are no things so
remote, nor so contrary, which the mind cannot, by this art of
composition, bring into one idea; as is visible in that signified by
the name UNIVERSE.




CHAPTER XXV.
OF RELATION.


1. Relation, what.

BESIDES the ideas, whether simple or complex, that the mind has of
things as they are in themselves, there are others it gets from their
comparison one with another. The understanding, in the consideration of
anything, is not confined to that precise object: it can carry any idea
as it were beyond itself, or at least look beyond it, to see how it
stands in conformity to any other. When the mind so considers one
thing, that it does as it were bring it to, and set it by another, and
carries its view from one to the other—this is, as the words import,
RELATION and RESPECT; and the denominations given to positive things,
intimating that respect, and serving as marks to lead the thoughts
beyond the subject itself denominated, to something distinct from it,
are what we call RELATIVES; and the things so brought together,
RELATED. Thus, when the mind considers Caius as such a positive being,
it takes nothing into that idea but what really exists in Caius; v.g.
when I consider him as a man, I have nothing in my mind but the complex
idea of the species, man. So likewise, when I say Caius is a white man,
I have nothing but the bare consideration of a man who hath that white
colour. But when I give Caius the name HUSBAND, I intimate some other
person; and when I give him the name WHITER, I intimate some other
thing: in both cases my thought is led to something beyond Caius, and
there are two things brought into consideration. And since any idea,
whether simple or complex, may be the occasion why the mind thus brings
two things together, and as it were takes a view of them at once,
though still considered as distinct: therefore any of our ideas may be
the foundation of relation. As in the above-mentioned instance, the
contract and ceremony of marriage with Sempronia is the occasion of the
denomination and relation of husband; and the colour white the occasion
why he is said to be whiter than free-stone.

2. Ideas of relations without correlative Terms, not easily
apprehended.

These and the like relations, expressed by relative terms that have
others answering them, with a reciprocal intimation, as father and son,
bigger and less, cause and effect, are very obvious to every one, and
everybody at first sight perceives the relation. For father and son,
husband and wife, and such other correlative terms, seem so nearly to
belong one to another, and, through custom, do so readily chime and
answer one another in people’s memories, that, upon the naming of
either of them, the thoughts are presently carried beyond the thing so
named; and nobody overlooks or doubts of a relation, where it is so
plainly intimated. But where languages have failed to give correlative
names, there the relation is not always so easily taken notice of.
CONCUBINE is, no doubt, a relative name, as well as wife: but in
languages where this and the like words have not a correlative term,
there people are not so apt to take them to be so, as wanting that
evident mark of relation which is between correlatives, which seem to
explain one another, and not to be able to exist, but together. Hence
it is, that many of those names, which, duly considered, do include
evident relations, have been called EXTERNAL DENOMINATIONS. But all
names that are more than empty sounds must signify some idea, which is
either in the thing to which the name is applied, and then it is
positive, and is looked on as united to and existing in the thing to
which the denomination is given; or else it arises from the respect the
mind finds in it to something distinct from it, with which it considers
it, and then it includes a relation.

3. Some seemingly absolute Terms contain Relations.

Another sort of relative terms there is, which are not looked on to be
either relative, or so much as external denominations: which yet, under
the form and appearance of signifying something absolute in the
subject, do conceal a tacit, though less observable, relation. Such are
the seemingly positive terms of OLD, GREAT, IMPERFECT, &c., whereof I
shall have occasion to speak more at large in the following chapters.

4. Relation different from the Things related.

This further may be observed, That the ideas of relations may be the
same in men who have far different ideas of the things that are
related, or that are thus compared: v. g. those who have far different
ideas of a man, may yet agree in the notion of a father; which is a
notion superinduced to the substance, or man, and refers only to an act
of that thing called man whereby he contributed to the generation of
one of his own kind, let man be what it will.

5. Change of Relation may be without any Change in the things related.

The nature therefore of relation consists in the referring or comparing
two things one to another; from which comparison one or both comes to
be denominated. And if either of those things be removed, or cease to
be, the relation ceases, and the denomination consequent to it, though
the other receive in itself no alteration at all; v.g. Caius, whom I
consider to-day as a father, ceases to be so to-morrow, only by the
death of his son, without any alteration made in himself. Nay, barely
by the mind’s changing the object to which it compares anything, the
same thing is capable of having contrary denominations at the same
time: v.g. Caius, compared to several persons, may truly be said to be
older and younger, stronger and weaker, &c.

6. Relation only betwixt two things.

Whatsoever doth or can exist, or be considered as one thing is
positive: and so not only simple ideas and substances, but modes also,
are positive beings: though the parts of which they consist are very
often relative one to another: but the whole together considered as one
thing, and producing in us the complex idea of one thing, which idea is
in our minds, as one picture, though an aggregate of divers parts, and
under one name, it is a positive or absolute thing, or idea. Thus a
triangle, though the parts thereof compared one to another be relative,
yet the idea of the whole is a positive absolute idea. The same may be
said of a family, a tune, &c.; for there can be no relation but betwixt
two things considered as two things. There must always be in relation
two ideas or things, either in themselves really separate, or
considered as distinct, and then a ground or occasion for their
comparison.

7. All Things capable of Relation.

Concerning relation in general, these things may be considered:

First, That there is no one thing, whether simple idea, substance,
mode, or relation, or name of either of them, which is not capable of
almost an infinite number of considerations in reference to other
things: and therefore this makes no small part of men’s thoughts and
words: v.g. one single man may at once be concerned in, and sustain all
these following relations, and many more, viz. father, brother, son,
grandfather, grandson, father-in-law, son-in-law, husband, friend,
enemy, subject, general, judge, patron, client, professor, European,
Englishman, islander, servant, master, possessor, captain, superior,
inferior, bigger, less, older, younger, contemporary, like, unlike,
&c., to an almost infinite number: he being capable of as many
relations as there can be occasions of comparing him to other things,
in any manner of agreement, disagreement, or respect whatsoever. For,
as I said, relation is a way of comparing or considering two things
[*dropped line] from that comparison; and sometimes giving even the
relation itself a name.

8. Our Ideas of Relations often clearer than of the Subjects related.

Secondly, This further may be considered concerning relation, that
though it be not contained in the real existence of things, but
something extraneous and superinduced, yet the ideas which relative
words stand for are often clearer and more distinct than of those
substances to which they do belong. The notion we have of a father or
brother is a great deal clearer and more distinct than that we have of
a man; or, if you will, PATERNITY is a thing whereof it is easier to
have a clear idea, than of HUMANITY; and I can much easier conceive
what a friend is, than what God; because the knowledge of one action,
or one simple idea, is oftentimes sufficient to give me the notion of a
relation; but to the knowing of any substantial being, an accurate
collection of sundry ideas is necessary. A man, if he compares two
things together, can hardly be supposed not to know what it is wherein
he compares them: so that when he compares any things together, he
cannot but have a very clear idea of that relation. THE IDEAS, THEN, OF
RELATIONS, ARE CAPABLE AT LEAST OF BEING MORE PERFECT AND DISTINCT IN
OUR MINDS THAN THOSE OF SUBSTANCES. Because it is commonly hard to know
all the simple ideas which are really in any substance, but for the
most part easy enough to know the simple ideas that make up any
relation I think on, or have a name for: v.g. comparing two men in
reference to one common parent, it is very easy to frame the ideas of
brothers, without having yet the perfect idea of a man. For significant
relative words, as well as others, standing only for ideas; and those
being all either simple, or made up of simple ones, it suffices for the
knowing the precise idea the relative term stands for, to have a clear
conception of that which is the foundation of the relation; which may
be done without having a perfect and clear idea of the thing it is
attributed to. Thus, having the notion that one laid the egg out of
which the other was hatched, I have a clear idea of the relation of DAM
and CHICK between the two cassiowaries in St. James’s Park; though
perhaps I have but a very obscure and imperfect idea of those birds
themselves.

9. Relations all terminate in simple Ideas.

Thirdly, Though there be a great number of considerations wherein
things may be compared one with another, and so a multitude of
relations, yet they all terminate in, and are concerned about those
simple ideas, either of sensation or reflection, which I think to be
the whole materials of all our knowledge. To clear this, I shall show
it in the most considerable relations that we have any notion of; and
in some that seem to be the most remote from sense or reflection: which
yet will appear to have their ideas from thence, and leave it past
doubt that the notions we have of them are but certain simple ideas,
and so originally derived from sense or reflection.

10. Terms leading the Mind beyond the Subject denominated, are
relative.

Fourthly, That relation being the considering of one thing with another
which is extrinsical to it, it is evident that all words that
necessarily lead the mind to any other ideas than are supposed really
to exist in that thing to which the words are applied are relative
words: v.g.a MAN, BLACK, MERRY, THOUGHTFUL, THIRSTY, ANGRY, EXTENDED;
these and the like are all absolute, because they neither signify nor
intimate anything but what does or is supposed really to exist in the
man thus denominated; but FATHER, BROTHER, KING, HUSBAND, BLACKER,
MERRIER, &c., are words which, together with the thing they denominate,
imply also something else separate and exterior to the existence of
that thing.

11. All relatives made up of simple ideas.

Having laid down these premises concerning relation in general, I shall
now proceed to show, in some instances, how all the ideas we have of
relation are made up, as the others are, only of simple ideas; and that
they all, how refined or remote from sense soever they seem, terminate
at last in simple ideas. I shall begin with the most comprehensive
relation, wherein all things that do, or can exist, are concerned, and
that is the relation of CAUSE and EFFECT: the idea whereof, how derived
from the two fountains of all our knowledge, sensation and reflection,
I shall in the next place consider.




CHAPTER XXVI.
OF CAUSE AND EFFECT, AND OTHER RELATIONS.


1. Whence the Ideas of cause and effect got.

In the notice that our senses take of the constant vicissitude of
things, we cannot but observe that several particular, both qualities
and substances, begin to exist; and that they receive this their
existence from the due application and operation of some other being.
From this observation we get our ideas of CAUSE and EFFECT. THAT WHICH
PRODUCES ANY SIMPLE OR COMPLEX IDEA we denote by the general name,
CAUSE, and THAT WHICH IS PRODUCED, EFFECT. Thus, finding that in that
substance which we call wax, fluidity, which is a simple idea that was
not in it before, is constantly produced by the application of a
certain degree of heat we call the simple idea of heat, in relation to
fluidity in wax, the cause of it, and fluidity the effect. So also,
finding that the substance, wood, which is a certain collection of
simple ideas so called, by the application of fire, is turned into
another substance, called ashes; i. e., another complex idea,
consisting of a collection of simple ideas, quite different from that
complex idea which we call wood; we consider fire, in relation to
ashes, as cause, and the ashes, as effect. So that whatever is
considered by us to conduce or operate to the producing any particular
simple idea, or collection of simple ideas, whether substance or mode,
which did not before exist, hath thereby in our minds the relation of a
cause, and so is denominated by us.

2. Creation Generation, making Alteration.

Having thus, from what our senses are able to discover in the
operations of bodies on one another, got the notion of cause and
effect, viz. that a cause is that which makes any other thing, either
simple idea, substance, or mode, begin to be; and an effect is that
which had its beginning from some other thing; the mind finds no great
difficulty to distinguish the several originals of things into two
sorts:—

First, When the thing is wholly made new, so that no part thereof did
ever exist before; as when a new particle of matter doth begin to
exist, IN RERUM NATURA, which had before no being, and this we call
CREATION.

Secondly, When a thing is made up of particles, which did all of them
before exist; but that very thing, so constituted of pre-existing
particles, which, considered all together, make up such a collection of
simple ideas, had not any existence before, as this man, this egg,
rose, or cherry, &c. And this, when referred to a substance, produced
in the ordinary course of nature by internal principle, but set on work
by, and received from, some external agent, or cause, and working by
insensible ways which we perceive not, we call GENERATION. When the
cause is extrinsical, and the effect produced by a sensible separation,
or juxta-position of discernible parts, we call it MAKING; and such are
all artificial things. When any simple idea is produced, which was not
in that subject before, we call it ALTERATION. Thus a man is generated,
a picture made; and either of them altered, when any new sensible
quality or simple idea is produced in either of them, which was not
there before: and the things thus made to exist, which were not there
before, are effects; and those things which operated to the existence,
causes. In which, and all other cases, we may observe, that the notion
of cause and effect has its rise from ideas received by sensation or
reflection; and that this relation, how comprehensive soever,
terminates at last in them. For to have the idea of cause and effect,
it suffices to consider any simple idea or substance, as beginning to
exist, by the operation of some other, without knowing the manner of
that operation.

3. Relations of Time.

Time and place are also the foundations of very large relations; and
all finite beings at least are concerned in them. But having already
shown in another place how we get those ideas, it may suffice here to
intimate, that most of the denominations of things received from TIME
are only relations. Thus, when any one says that Queen Elizabeth lived
sixty-nine, and reigned forty-five years, these words import only the
relation of that duration to some other, and mean no more but this,
That the duration of her existence was equal to sixty-nine, and the
duration of her government to forty-five annual revolutions of the sun;
and so are all words, answering, HOW LONG? Again, William the Conqueror
invaded England about the year 1066; which means this, That, taking the
duration from our Saviour’s time till now for one entire great length
of time, it shows at what distance this invasion was from the two
extremes; and so do all words of time answering to the question, WHEN,
which show only the distance of any point of time from the period of a
longer duration, from which we measure, and to which we thereby
consider it as related.

4. Some ideas of Time supposed positive and found to be relative.

There are yet, besides those, other words of time, that ordinarily are
thought to stand for positive ideas, which yet will, when considered,
be found to be relative; such as are, young, old, &c., which include
and intimate the relation anything has to a certain length of duration,
whereof we have the idea in our minds. Thus, having settled in our
thoughts the idea of the ordinary duration of a man to be seventy
years, when we say a man is YOUNG, we mean that his age is yet but a
small part of that which usually men attain to; and when we denominate
him OLD, we mean that his duration is run out almost to the end of that
which men do not usually exceed. And so it is but comparing the
particular age or duration of this or that man, to the idea of that
duration which we have in our minds, as ordinarily belonging to that
sort of animals: which is plain in the application of these names to
other things; for a man is called young at twenty years, and very young
at seven years old: but yet a horse we call old at twenty, and a dog at
seven years, because in each of these we compare their age to different
ideas of duration, which are settled in our minds as belonging to these
several sorts of animals, in the ordinary course of nature. But the sun
and stars, though they have outlasted several generations of men, we
call not old, because we do not know what period God hath set to that
sort of beings. This term belonging properly to those things which we
can observe in the ordinary course of things, by a natural decay, to
come to an end in a certain period of time; and so have in our minds,
as it were, a standard to which we can compare the several parts of
their duration; and, by the relation they bear thereunto, call them
young or old; which we cannot, therefore, do to a ruby or a diamond,
things whose usual periods we know not.

5. Relations of Place and Extension.

The relation also that things have to one another in their PLACES and
distances is very obvious to observe; as above, below, a mile distant
from Charing-cross, in England, and in London. But as in duration, so
in extension and bulk, there are some ideas that are relative which we
signify by names that are thought positive; as GREAT and LITTLE are
truly relations. For here also, having, by observation, settled in our
minds the ideas of the bigness of several species of things from those
we have been most accustomed to, we make them as it were the standards,
whereby to denominate the bulk of others. Thus we call a great apple,
such a one as is bigger than the ordinary sort of those we have been
used to; and a little horse, such a one as comes not up to the size of
that idea which we have in our minds to belong ordinarily to horses;
and that will be a great horse to a Welchman, which is but a little one
to a Fleming; they two having, from the different breed of their
countries, taken several-sized ideas to which they compare, and in
relation to which they denominate their great and their little.

6. Absolute Terms often stand for Relations.

So likewise weak and strong are but relative denominations of power,
compared to some ideas we have at that time of greater or less power.
Thus, when we say a weak man, we mean one that has not so much strength
or power to move as usually men have, or usually those of his size
have; which is a comparing his strength to the idea we have of the
usual strength of men, or men of such a size. The like when we say the
creatures are all weak things; weak there is but a relative term,
signifying the disproportion there is in the power of God and the
creatures. And so abundance of words, in ordinary speech, stand only
for relations (and perhaps the greatest part) which at first sight seem
to have no such signification: v.g. the ship has necessary stores.
NECESSARY and STORES are both relative words; one having a relation to
the accomplishing the voyage intended, and the other to future use. All
which relations, how they are confined to, and terminate in ideas
derived from sensation or reflection, is too obvious to need any
explication.




CHAPTER XXVII.
OF IDENTITY AND DIVERSITY.


1. Wherein Identity consists.

ANOTHER occasion the mind often takes of comparing, is the very being
of things, when, considering ANYTHING AS EXISTING AT ANY DETERMINED
TIME AND PLACE, we compare it with ITSELF EXISTING AT ANOTHER TIME, and
thereon form the ideas of IDENTITY and DIVERSITY. When we see anything
to be in any place in any instant of time, we are sure (be it what it
will) that it is that very thing, and not another which at that same
time exists in another place, how like and undistinguishable soever it
may be in all other respects: and in this consists IDENTITY, when the
ideas it is attributed to vary not at all from what they were that
moment wherein we consider their former existence, and to which we
compare the present. For we never finding, nor conceiving it possible,
that two things of the same kind should exist in the same place at the
same time, we rightly conclude, that, whatever exists anywhere at any
time, excludes all of the same kind, and is there itself alone. When
therefore we demand whether anything be the SAME or no, it refers
always to something that existed such a time in such a place, which it
was certain, at that instant, was the same with itself, and no other.
From whence it follows, that one thing cannot have two beginnings of
existence, nor two things one beginning; it being impossible for two
things of the same kind to be or exist in the same instant, in the very
same place; or one and the same thing in different places. That,
therefore, that had one beginning, is the same thing; and that which
had a different beginning in time and place from that, is not the same,
but diverse. That which has made the difficulty about this relation has
been the little care and attention used in having precise notions of
the things to which it is attributed.

2. Identity of Substances.

We have the ideas but of three sorts of substances: 1. GOD. 2. FINITE
INTELLIGENCES. 3. BODIES.

First, GOD is without beginning, eternal, unalterable, and everywhere,
and therefore concerning his identity there can be no doubt.

Secondly, FINITE SPIRITS having had each its determinated time and
place of beginning to exist, the relation to that time and place will
always determine to each of them its identity, as long as it exists.

Thirdly, The same will hold of every PARTICLE OF MATTER, to which no
addition or subtraction of matter being made, it is the same. For,
though these three sorts of substances, as we term them, do not exclude
one another out of the same place, yet we cannot conceive but that they
must necessarily each of them exclude any of the same kind out of the
same place: or else the notions and names of identity and diversity
would be in vain, and there could be no such distinctions of
substances, or anything else one from another. For example: could two
bodies be in the same place at the same time; then those two parcels of
matter must be one and the same, take them great or little; nay, all
bodies must be one and the same. For, by the same reason that two
particles of matter may be in one place, all bodies may be in one
place: which, when it can be supposed, takes away the distinction of
identity and diversity of one and more, and renders it ridiculous. But
it being a contradiction that two or more should be one, identity and
diversity are relations and ways of comparing well founded, and of use
to the understanding.

3. Identity of modes and relations.

All other things being but modes or relations ultimately terminated in
substances, the identity and diversity of each particular existence of
them too will be by the same way determined: only as to things whose
existence is in succession, such as are the actions of finite beings,
v. g. MOTION and THOUGHT, both which consist in a continued train of
succession, concerning THEIR diversity there can be no question:
because each perishing the moment it begins, they cannot exist in
different times, or in different places, as permanent beings can at
different times exist in distant places; and therefore no motion or
thought, considered as at different times, can be the same, each part
thereof having a different beginning of existence.

4. Principium Individuationis.

From what has been said, it is easy to discover what is so much
inquired after, the PRINCIPIUM INDIVIDUATIONIS; and that, it is plain,
is existence itself; which determines a being of any sort to a
particular time and place, incommunicable to two beings of the same
kind. This, though it seems easier to conceive in simple substances or
modes; yet, when reflected on, is not more difficult in compound ones,
if care be taken to what it is applied: v.g. let us suppose an atom,
i.e. a continued body under one immutable superficies, existing in a
determined time and place; it is evident, that, considered in any
instant of its existence, it is in that instant the same with itself.
For, being at that instant what it is, and nothing else, it is the
same, and so must continue as long as its existence is continued; for
so long it will be the same, and no other. In like manner, if two or
more atoms be joined together into the same mass, every one of those
atoms will be the same, by the foregoing rule: and whilst they exist
united together, the mass, consisting of the same atoms, must be the
same mass, or the same body, let the parts be ever so differently
jumbled. But if one of these atoms be taken away, or one new one added,
it is no longer the same mass or the same body. In the state of living
creatures, their identity depends not on a mass of the same particles,
but on something else. For in them the variation of great parcels of
matter alters not the identity: an oak growing from a plant to a great
tree, and then lopped, is still the same oak; and a colt grown up to a
horse, sometimes fat, sometimes lean, is all the while the same horse:
though, in both these cases, there may be a manifest change of the
parts; so that truly they are not either of them the same masses of
matter, though they be truly one of them the same oak, and the other
the same horse. The reason whereof is, that, in these two cases—a MASS
OF MATTER and a LIVING BODY—identity is not applied to the same thing.

5. Identity of Vegetables.

We must therefore consider wherein an oak differs from a mass of
matter, and that seems to me to be in this, that the one is only the
cohesion of particles of matter any how united, the other such a
disposition of them as constitutes the parts of an oak; and such an
organization of those parts as is fit to receive and distribute
nourishment, so as to continue and frame the wood, bark, and leaves,
&c., of an oak, in which consists the vegetable life. That being then
one plant which has such an organization of parts in one coherent body,
partaking of one common life, it continues to be the same plant as long
as it partakes of the same life, though that life be communicated to
new particles of matter vitally united to the living plant, in a like
continued organization conformable to that sort of plants. For this
organization, being at any one instant in any one collection of matter,
is in that particular concrete distinguished from all other, and IS
that individual life, which existing constantly from that moment both
forwards and backwards, in the same continuity of insensibly succeeding
parts united to the living body of the plant, it has that identity
which makes the same plant, and all the parts of it, parts of the same
plant, during all the time that they exist united in that continued
organization, which is fit to convey that common life to all the parts
so united.

6. Identity of Animals.

The case is not so much different in BRUTES but that any one may hence
see what makes an animal and continues it the same. Something we have
like this in machines, and may serve to illustrate it. For example,
what is a watch? It is plain it is nothing but a fit organization or
construction of parts to a certain end, which, when a sufficient force
is added to it, it is capable to attain. If we would suppose this
machine one continued body, all whose organized parts were repaired,
increased, or diminished by a constant addition or separation of
insensible parts, with one common life, we should have something very
much like the body of an animal; with this difference, That, in an
animal the fitness of the organization, and the motion wherein life
consists, begin together, the motion coming from within; but in
machines the force coming sensibly from without, is often away when the
organ is in order, and well fitted to receive it.

7. The Identity of Man.

This also shows wherein the identity of the same MAN consists; viz. in
nothing but a participation of the same continued life, by constantly
fleeting particles of matter, in succession vitally united to the same
organized body. He that shall place the identity of man in anything
else, but, like that of other animals, in one fitly organized body,
taken in any one instant, and from thence continued, under one
organization of life, in several successively fleeting particles of
matter united to it, will find it hard to make an embryo, one of years,
mad and sober, the SAME man, by any supposition, that will not make it
possible for Seth, Ismael, Socrates, Pilate, St. Austin, and Caesar
Borgia, to be the same man. For if the identity of SOUL ALONE makes the
same MAN; and there be nothing in the nature of matter why the same
individual spirit may not be united to different bodies, it will be
possible that those men, living in distant ages, and of different
tempers, may have been the same man: which way of speaking must be from
a very strange use of the word man, applied to an idea out of which
body and shape are excluded. And that way of speaking would agree yet
worse with the notions of those philosophers who allow of
transmigration, and are of opinion that the souls of men may, for their
miscarriages, be detruded into the bodies of beasts, as fit
habitations, with organs suited to the satisfaction of their brutal
inclinations. But yet I think nobody, could he be sure that the SOUL of
Heliogabalus were in one of his hogs, would yet say that hog were a MAN
or Heliogabalus.

8. Idea of Identity suited to the Idea it is applied to.

It is not therefore unity of substance that comprehends all sorts of
identity, or will determine it in every case; but to conceive and judge
of it aright, we must consider what idea the word it is applied to
stands for: it being one thing to be the same SUBSTANCE, another the
same MAN, and a third the same PERSON, if PERSON, MAN, and SUBSTANCE,
are three names standing for three different ideas;—for such as is the
idea belonging to that name, such must be the identity; which, if it
had been a little more carefully attended to, would possibly have
prevented a great deal of that confusion which often occurs about this
matter, with no small seeming difficulties, especially concerning
PERSONAL identity, which therefore we shall in the next place a little
consider.

9. Same man.

An animal is a living organized body; and consequently the same animal,
as we have observed, is the same continued LIFE communicated to
different particles of matter, as they happen successively to be united
to that organized living body. And whatever is talked of other
definitions, ingenious observation puts it past doubt, that the idea in
our minds, of which the sound man in our mouths is the sign, is nothing
else but of an animal of such a certain form. Since I think I may be
confident, that, whoever should see a creature of his own shape or
make, though it had no more reason all its life than a cat or a parrot,
would call him still a MAN; or whoever should hear a cat or a parrot
discourse, reason, and philosophize, would call or think it nothing but
a CAT or a PARROT; and say, the one was a dull irrational man, and the
other a very intelligent rational parrot.

10. Same man.

For I presume it is not the idea of a thinking or rational being alone
that makes the IDEA OF A MAN in most people’s sense: but of a body, so
and so shaped, joined to it; and if that be the idea of a man, the same
successive body not shifted all at once, must, as well as the same
immaterial spirit, go to the making of the same man.

11. Personal Identity.

This being premised, to find wherein personal identity consists, we
must consider what PERSON stands for;—which, I think, is a thinking
intelligent being, that has reason and reflection, and can consider
itself as itself, the same thinking thing, in different times and
places; which it does only by that consciousness which is inseparable
from thinking, and, as it seems to me, essential to it: it being
impossible for any one to perceive without PERCEIVING that he does
perceive. When we see, hear, smell, taste, feel, meditate, or will
anything, we know that we do so. Thus it is always as to our present
sensations and perceptions: and by this every one is to himself that
which he calls SELF:—it not being considered, in this case, whether the
same self be continued in the same or divers substances. For, since
consciousness always accompanies thinking, and it is that which makes
every one to be what he calls self, and thereby distinguishes himself
from all other thinking things, in this alone consists personal
identity, i.e. the sameness of a rational being: and as far as this
consciousness can be extended backwards to any past action or thought,
so far reaches the identity of that person; it is the same self now it
was then; and it is by the same self with this present one that now
reflects on it, that that action was done.

12. Consciousness makes personal Identity.

But it is further inquired, whether it be the same identical substance.
This few would think they had reason to doubt of, if these perceptions,
with their consciousness, always remained present in the mind, whereby
the same thinking thing would be always consciously present, and, as
would be thought, evidently the same to itself. But that which seems to
make the difficulty is this, that this consciousness being interrupted
always by forgetfulness, there being no moment of our lives wherein we
have the whole train of all our past actions before our eyes in one
view, but even the best memories losing the sight of one part whilst
they are viewing another; and we sometimes, and that the greatest part
of our lives, not reflecting on our past selves, being intent on our
present thoughts, and in sound sleep having no thoughts at all, or at
least none with that consciousness which remarks our waking thoughts,—I
say, in all these cases, our consciousness being interrupted, and we
losing the sight of our past selves, doubts are raised whether we are
the same thinking thing, i.e. the same SUBSTANCE or no. Which, however
reasonable or unreasonable, concerns not PERSONAL identity at all. The
question being what makes the same person; and not whether it be the
same identical substance, which always thinks in the same person,
which, in this case, matters not at all: different substances, by the
same consciousness (where they do partake in it) being united into one
person, as well as different bodies by the same life are united into
one animal, whose identity is preserved in that change of substances by
the unity of one continued life. For, it being the same consciousness
that makes a man be himself to himself, personal identity depends on
that only, whether it be annexed solely to one individual substance, or
can be continued in a succession of several substances. For as far as
any intelligent being CAN repeat the idea of any past action with the
same consciousness it had of it at first, and with the same
consciousness it has of any present action; so far it is the same
personal self. For it is by the consciousness it has of its present
thoughts and actions, that it is SELF TO ITSELF now, and so will be the
same self, as far as the same consciousness can extend to actions past
or to come; and would be by distance of time, or change of substance,
no more two persons, than a man be two men by wearing other clothes
to-day than he did yesterday, with a long or a short sleep between: the
same consciousness uniting those distant actions into the same person,
whatever substances contributed to their production.

13. Personal Identity in Change of Substance.

That this is so, we have some kind of evidence in our very bodies, all
whose particles, whilst vitally united to this same thinking conscious
self, so that WE FEEL when they are touched, and are affected by, and
conscious of good or harm that happens to them, are a part of
ourselves; i.e. of our thinking conscious self. Thus, the limbs of his
body are to every one a part of himself; he sympathizes and is
concerned for them. Cut off a hand, and thereby separate it from that
consciousness he had of its heat, cold, and other affections, and it is
then no longer a part of that which is himself, any more than the
remotest part of matter. Thus, we see the SUBSTANCE whereof personal
self consisted at one time may be varied at another, without the change
of personal identity; there being no question about the same person,
though the limbs which but now were a part of it, be cut off.

14. Personality in Change of Substance.

But the question is, Whether if the same substance which thinks be
changed, it can be the same person; or, remaining the same, it can be
different persons?

And to this I answer: First, This can be no question at all to those
who place thought in a purely material animal constitution, void of an
immaterial substance. For, whether their supposition be true or no, it
is plain they conceive personal identity preserved in something else
than identity of substance; as animal identity is preserved in identity
of life, and not of substance. And therefore those who place thinking
in an immaterial substance only, before they can come to deal with
these men, must show why personal identity cannot be preserved in the
change of immaterial substances, or variety of particular immaterial
substances, as well as animal identity is preserved in the change of
material substances, or variety of particular bodies: unless they will
say, it is one immaterial spirit that makes the same life in brutes, as
it is one immaterial spirit that makes the same person in men; which
the Cartesians at least will not admit, for fear of making brutes
thinking things too.

15. Whether in Change of thinking Substances there can be one Person.

But next, as to the first part of the question, Whether, if the same
thinking substance (supposing immaterial substances only to think) be
changed, it can be the same person? I answer, that cannot be resolved
but by those who know there can what kind of substances they are that
do think; and whether the consciousness of past actions can be
transferred from one thinking substance to another. I grant were the
same consciousness the same individual action it could not: but it
being a present representation of a past action, why it may not be
possible, that that may be represented to the mind to have been which
really never was, will remain to be shown. And therefore how far the
consciousness of past actions is annexed to any individual agent, so
that another cannot possibly have it, will be hard for us to determine,
till we know what kind of action it is that cannot be done without a
reflex act of perception accompanying it, and how performed by thinking
substances, who cannot think without being conscious of it. But that
which we call the same consciousness, not being the same individual
act, why one intellectual substance may not have represented to it, as
done by itself, what IT never did, and was perhaps done by some other
agent—why, I say, such a representation may not possibly be without
reality of matter of fact, as well as several representations in dreams
are, which yet whilst dreaming we take for true—will be difficult to
conclude from the nature of things. And that it never is so, will by
us, till we have clearer views of the nature of thinking substances, be
best resolved into the goodness of God; who, as far as the happiness or
misery of any of his sensible creatures is concerned in it, will not,
by a fatal error of theirs, transfer from one to another that
consciousness which draws reward or punishment with it. How far this
may be an argument against those who would place thinking in a system
of fleeting animal spirits, I leave to be considered. But yet, to
return to the question before us, it must be allowed, that, if the same
consciousness (which, as has been shown, is quite a different thing
from the same numerical figure or motion in body) can be transferred
from one thinking substance to another, it will be possible that two
thinking substances may make but one person. For the same consciousness
being preserved, whether in the same or different substances, the
personal identity is preserved.

16. Whether, the same immaterial Substance remaining, there can be two
Persons.

As to the second part of the question, Whether the same immaterial
substance remaining, there may be two distinct persons; which question
seems to me to be built on this,—Whether the same immaterial being,
being conscious of the action of its past duration, may be wholly
stripped of all the consciousness of its past existence, and lose it
beyond the power of ever retrieving it again: and so as it were
beginning a new account from a new period, have a consciousness that
CANNOT reach beyond this new state. All those who hold pre-existence
are evidently of this mind; since they allow the soul to have no
remaining consciousness of what it did in that pre-existent state,
either wholly separate from body, or informing any other body; and if
they should not, it is plain experience would be against them. So that
personal identity, reaching no further than consciousness reaches, a
pre-existent spirit not having continued so many ages in a state of
silence, must needs make different persons. Suppose a Christian
Platonist or a Pythagorean should, upon God’s having ended all his
works of creation the seventh day, think his soul hath existed ever
since; and should imagine it has revolved in several human bodies; as I
once met with one, who was persuaded his had been the SOUL of Socrates
(how reasonably I will not dispute; this I know, that in the post he
filled, which was no inconsiderable one, he passed for a very rational
man, and the press has shown that he wanted not parts or
learning;)—would any one say, that he, being not conscious of any of
Socrates’s actions or thoughts, could be the same PERSON with Socrates?
Let any one reflect upon himself, and conclude that he has in himself
an immaterial spirit, which is that which thinks in him, and, in the
constant change of his body keeps him the same: and is that which he
calls HIMSELF: let him also suppose it to be the same soul that was in
Nestor or Thersites, at the siege of Troy, (for souls being, as far as
we know anything of them, in their nature indifferent to any parcel of
matter, the supposition has no apparent absurdity in it,) which it may
have been, as well as it is now the soul of any other man: but he now
having no consciousness of any of the actions either of Nestor or
Thersites, does or can he conceive himself the same person with either
of them? Can he be concerned in either of their actions? attribute them
to himself, or think them his own more than the actions of any other
men that ever existed? So that this consciousness, not reaching to any
of the actions of either of those men, he is no more one SELF with
either of them than of the soul of immaterial spirit that now informs
him had been created, and began to exist, when it began to inform his
present body; though it were never so true, that the same SPIRIT that
informed Nestor’s or Thersites’ body were numerically the same that now
informs his. For this would no more make him the same person with
Nestor, than if some of the particles of smaller that were once a part
of Nestor were now a part of this man the same immaterial substance,
without the same consciousness, no more making the same person, by
being united to any body, than the same particle of matter, without
consciousness, united to any body, makes the same person. But let him
once find himself conscious of any of the actions of Nestor, he then
finds himself the same person with Nestor.

17. The body, as well as the soul, goes to the making of a Man.

And thus may we be able, without any difficulty, to conceive the same
person at the resurrection, though in a body not exactly in make or
parts the same which he had here,—the same consciousness going along
with the soul that inhabits it. But yet the soul alone, in the change
of bodies, would scarce to any one but to him that makes the soul the
man, be enough to make the same man. For should the soul of a prince,
carrying with it the consciousness of the prince’s past life, enter and
inform the body of a cobbler, as soon as deserted by his own soul,
every one sees he would be the same PERSON with the prince, accountable
only for the prince’s actions: but who would say it was the same MAN?
The body too goes to the making the man, and would, I guess, to
everybody determine the man in this case, wherein the soul, with all
its princely thoughts about it, would not make another man: but he
would be the same cobbler to every one besides himself. I know that, in
the ordinary way of speaking, the same person, and the same man, stand
for one and the same thing. And indeed every one will always have a
liberty to speak as he pleases, and to apply what articulate sounds to
what ideas he thinks fit, and change them as often as he pleases. But
yet, when we will inquire what makes the same SPIRIT, MAN, or PERSON,
we must fix the ideas of spirit, man, or person in our minds; and
having resolved with ourselves what we mean by them, it will not be
hard to determine, in either of them, or the like, when it is the same,
and when not.

18. Consciousness alone unites actions into the same Person.

But though the same immaterial substance or soul does not alone,
wherever it be, and in whatsoever state, make the same MAN; yet it is
plain, consciousness, as far as ever it can be extended—should it be to
ages past—unites existences and actions very remote in time into the
same PERSON, as well as it does the existences and actions of the
immediately preceding moment: so that whatever has the consciousness of
present and past actions, is the same person to whom they both belong.
Had I the same consciousness that I saw the ark and Noah’s flood, as
that I saw an overflowing of the Thames last winter, or as that I write
now, I could no more doubt that I who write this now, that saw the
Thames overflowed last winter, and that viewed the flood at the general
deluge, was the same SELF,—place that self in what SUBSTANCE you
please—than that I who write this am the same MYSELF now whilst I write
(whether I consist of all the same substance material or immaterial, or
no) that I was yesterday. For as to this point of being the same self,
it matters not whether this present self be made up of the same or
other substances—I being as much concerned, and as justly accountable
for any action that was done a thousand years since, appropriated to me
now by this self-consciousness, as I am for what I did the last moment.

19. Self depends on Consciousness, not on Substance.

SELF is that conscious thinking thing,—whatever substance made up of,
(whether spiritual or material, simple or compounded, it matters
not)—which is sensible or conscious of pleasure and pain, capable of
happiness or misery, and so is concerned for itself, as far as that
consciousness extends. Thus every one finds that, whilst comprehended
under that consciousness, the little finger is as much a part of
himself as what is most so. Upon separation of this little finger,
should this consciousness go along with the little finger, and leave
the rest of the body, it is evident the little finger would be the
person, the same person; and self then would have nothing to do with
the rest of the body. As in this case it is the consciousness that goes
along with the substance, when one part is separate from another, which
makes the same person, and constitutes this inseparable self: so it is
in reference to substances remote in time. That with which the
consciousness of this present thinking thing CAN join itself, makes the
same person, and is one self with it, and with nothing else; and so
attributes to itself, and owns all the actions of that thing, as its
own, as far as that consciousness reaches, and no further; as every one
who reflects will perceive.

20. Persons, not Substances, the Objects of Reward and Punishment.

In this personal identity is founded all the right and justice of
reward and punishment; happiness and misery being that for which every
one is concerned for HIMSELF, and not mattering what becomes of any
SUBSTANCE, not joined to, or affected with that consciousness. For, as
it is evident in the instance I gave but now, if the consciousness went
along with the little finger when it was cut off, that would be the
same self which was concerned for the whole body yesterday, as making
part of itself, whose actions then it cannot but admit as its own now.
Though, if the same body should still live, and immediately from the
separation of the little finger have its own peculiar consciousness,
whereof the little finger knew nothing, it would not at all be
concerned for it, as a part of itself, or could own any of its actions,
or have any of them imputed to him.

21. Which shows wherein Personal identity consists.

This may show us wherein personal identity consists: not in the
identity of substance, but, as I have said, in the identity of
consciousness, wherein if Socrates and the present mayor of
Queenborough agree, they are the same person: if the same Socrates
waking and sleeping do not partake of the same consciousness, Socrates
waking and sleeping is not the same person. And to punish Socrates
waking for what sleeping Socrates thought, and waking Socrates was
never conscious of, would be no more of right, than to punish one twin
for what his brother-twin did, whereof he knew nothing, because their
outsides were so like, that they could not be distinguished; for such
twins have been seen.

22. Absolute oblivion separates what is thus forgotten from the person,
but not from the man.

But yet possibly it will still be objected,—Suppose I wholly lose the
memory of some parts of my life, beyond a possibility of retrieving
them, so that perhaps I shall never be conscious of them again; yet am
I not the same person that did those actions, had those thoughts that I
once was conscious of, though I have now forgot them? To which I
answer, that we must here take notice what the word _I_ is applied to;
which, in this case, is the MAN only. And the same man being presumed
to be the same person, I is easily here supposed to stand also for the
same person. But if it be possible for the same man to have distinct
incommunicable consciousness at different times, it is past doubt the
same man would at different times make different persons; which, we
see, is the sense of mankind in the solemnest declaration of their
opinions, human laws not punishing the mad man for the sober man’s
actions, nor the sober man for what the mad man did,—thereby making
them two persons: which is somewhat explained by our way of speaking in
English when we say such an one is ‘not himself,’ or is ‘beside
himself’; in which phrases it is insinuated, as if those who now, or at
least first used them, thought that self was changed; the selfsame
person was no longer in that man.

23. Difference between Identity of Man and of Person.

But yet it is hard to conceive that Socrates, the same individual man,
should be two persons. To help us a little in this, we must consider
what is meant by Socrates, or the same individual MAN.

First, it must be either the same individual, immaterial, thinking
substance; in short, the same numerical soul, and nothing else.

Secondly, or the same animal, without any regard to an immaterial soul.

Thirdly, or the same immaterial spirit united to the same animal.

Now, take which of these suppositions you please, it is impossible to
make personal identity to consist in anything but consciousness; or
reach any further than that does.

For, by the first of them, it must be allowed possible that a man born
of different women, and in distant times, may be the same man. A way of
speaking which, whoever admits, must allow it possible for the same man
to be two distinct persons, as any two that have lived in different
ages without the knowledge of one another’s thoughts.

By the second and third, Socrates, in this life and after it, cannot be
the same man any way, but by the same consciousness; and so making
human identity to consist in the same thing wherein we place personal
identity, there will be difficulty to allow the same man to be the same
person. But then they who place human identity in consciousness only,
and not in something else, must consider how they will make the infant
Socrates the same man with Socrates after the resurrection. But
whatsoever to some men makes a man, and consequently the same
individual man, wherein perhaps few are agreed, personal identity can
by us be placed in nothing but consciousness, (which is that alone
which makes what we call SELF,) without involving us in great
absurdities.

24.

But is not a man drunk and sober the same person? why else is he
punished for the fact he commits when drunk, though he be never
afterwards conscious of it? Just as much the same person as a man that
walks, and does other things in his sleep, is the same person, and is
answerable for any mischief he shall do in it. Human laws punish both,
with a justice suitable to THEIR way of knowledge;—because, in these
cases, they cannot distinguish certainly what is real, what
counterfeit: and so the ignorance in drunkenness or sleep is not
admitted as a plea. But in the Great Day, wherein the secrets of all
hearts shall be laid open, it may be reasonable to think, no one shall
be made to answer for what he knows nothing of; but shall receive his
doom, his conscience accusing or excusing him.

25. Consciousness alone unites remote existences into one Person.

Nothing but consciousness can unite remote existences into the same
person: the identity of substance will not do it; for whatever
substance there is, however framed, without consciousness there is no
person: and a carcass may be a person, as well as any sort of substance
be so, without consciousness.

Could we suppose two distinct incommunicable consciousnesses acting the
same body, the one constantly by day, the other by night; and, on the
other side, the same consciousness, acting by intervals, two distinct
bodies: I ask, in the first case, whether the day and the night—man
would not be two as distinct persons as Socrates and Plato? And
whether, in the second case, there would not be one person in two
distinct bodies, as much as one man is the same in two distinct
clothings? Nor is it at all material to say, that this same, and this
distinct consciousness, in the cases above mentioned, is owing to the
same and distinct immaterial substances, bringing it with them to those
bodies; which, whether true or no, alters not the case: since it is
evident the personal identity would equally be determined by the
consciousness, whether that consciousness were annexed to some
individual immaterial substance or no. For, granting that the thinking
substance in man must be necessarily supposed immaterial, it is evident
that immaterial thinking thing may sometimes part with its past
consciousness, and be restored to it again: as appears in the
forgetfulness men often have of their past actions; and the mind many
times recovers the memory of a past consciousness, which it had lost
for twenty years together. Make these intervals of memory and
forgetfulness to take their turns regularly by day and night, and you
have two persons with the same immaterial spirit, as much as in the
former instance two persons with the same body. So that self is not
determined by identity or diversity of substance, which it cannot be
sure of, but only by identity of consciousness.

26. Not the substance with which the consciousness may be united.

Indeed it may conceive the substance whereof it is now made up to have
existed formerly, united in the same conscious being: but,
consciousness removed, that substance is no more itself, or makes no
more a part of it, than any other substance; as is evident in the
instance we have already given of a limb cut off, of whose heat, or
cold, or other affections, having no longer any consciousness, it is no
more of a man’s self than any other matter of the universe. In like
manner it will be in reference to any immaterial substance, which is
void of that consciousness whereby I am myself to myself: so that I
cannot upon recollection join with that present consciousness whereby I
am now myself, it is, in that part of its existence, no more MYSELF
than any other immaterial being. For, whatsoever any substance has
thought or done, which I cannot recollect, and by my consciousness make
my own thought and action, it will no more belong to me, whether a part
of me thought or did it, than if it had been thought or done by any
other immaterial being anywhere existing.

27. Consciousness unites substances, material or spiritual, with the
same personality.

I agree, the more probable opinion is, that this consciousness is
annexed to, and the affection of, one individual immaterial substance.

But let men, according to their diverse hypotheses, resolve of that as
they please. This every intelligent being, sensible of happiness or
misery, must grant—that there is something that is HIMSELF, that he is
concerned for, and would have happy; that this self has existed in a
continued duration more than one instant, and therefore it is possible
may exist, as it has done, months and years to come, without any
certain bounds to be set to its duration; and may be the same self, by
the same consciousness continued on for the future. And thus, by this
consciousness he finds himself to be the same self which did such and
such an action some years since, by which he comes to be happy or
miserable now. In all which account of self, the same numerical
SUBSTANCE is not considered a making the same self; but the same
continued CONSCIOUSNESS, in which several substances may have been
united, and again separated from it, which, whilst they continued in a
vital union with that wherein this consciousness then resided, made a
part of that same self. Thus any part of our bodies, vitally united to
that which is conscious in us, makes a part of ourselves: but upon
separation from the vital union by which that consciousness is
communicated, that which a moment since was part of ourselves, is now
no more so than a part of another man’s self is a part of me: and it is
not impossible but in a little time may become a real part of another
person. And so we have the same numerical substance become a part of
two different persons; and the same person preserved under the change
of various substances. Could we suppose any spirit wholly stripped of
all its memory of consciousness of past actions, as we find our minds
always are of a great part of ours, and sometimes of them all; the
union or separation of such a spiritual substance would make no
variation of personal identity, any more than that of any particle of
matter does. Any substance vitally united to the present thinking being
is a part of that very same self which now is; anything united to it by
a consciousness of former actions, makes also a part of the same self,
which is the same both then and now.

28. Person a forensic Term.

PERSON, as I take it, is the name for this self. Wherever a man finds
what he calls himself, there, I think, another may say is the same
person. It is a forensic term, appropriating actions and their merit;
and so belongs only to intelligent agents, capable of a law, and
happiness, and misery. This personality extends itself beyond present
existence to what is past, only by consciousness,—whereby it becomes
concerned and accountable; owns and imputes to itself past actions,
just upon the same ground and for the same reason as it does the
present. All which is founded in a concern for happiness, the
unavoidable concomitant of consciousness; that which is conscious of
pleasure and pain, desiring that that self that is conscious should be
happy. And therefore whatever past actions it cannot reconcile or
APPROPRIATE to that present self by consciousness, it can be no more
concerned in than if they had never been done: and to receive pleasure
or pain, i.e. reward or punishment, on the account of any such action,
is all one as to be made happy or miserable in its first being, without
any demerit at all. For, supposing a MAN punished now for what he had
done in another life, whereof he could be made to have no consciousness
at all, what difference is there between that punishment and being
CREATED miserable? And therefore, conformable to this, the apostle
tells us, that, at the great day, when every one shall ‘receive
according to his doings, the secrets of all hearts shall be laid open.’
The sentence shall be justified by the consciousness all persons shall
have, that THEY THEMSELVES, in what bodies soever they appear, or what
substances soever that consciousness adheres to, are the SAME that
committed those actions, and deserve that punishment for them.

29. Suppositions that look strange are pardonable in our ignorance.

I am apt enough to think I have, in treating of this subject, made some
suppositions that will look strange to some readers, and possibly they
are so in themselves. But yet, I think they are such as are pardonable,
in this ignorance we are in of the nature of that thinking thing that
is in us, and which we look on as OURSELVES. Did we know what it was;
or how it was tied to a certain system of fleeting animal spirits; or
whether it could or could not perform its operations of thinking and
memory out of a body organized as ours is; and whether it has pleased
God that no one such spirit shall ever be united to any but one such
body, upon the right constitution of whose organs its memory should
depend; we might see the absurdity of some of those suppositions I have
made. But taking, as we ordinarily now do (in the dark concerning these
matters,) the soul of a man for an immaterial substance, independent
from matter, and indifferent alike to it all; there can, from the
nature of things, be no absurdity at all to suppose that the same SOUL
may at different times be united to different BODIES, and with them
make up for that time one MAN: as well as we suppose a part of a
sheep’s body yesterday should be a part of a man’s body to-morrow, and
in that union make a vital part of Meliboeus himself, as well as it did
of his ram.

30. The Difficulty from ill Use of Names.

To conclude: Whatever substance begins to exist, it must, during its
existence, necessarily be the same: whatever compositions of substances
begin to exist, during the union of those substances, the concrete must
be the same: whatsoever mode begins to exist, during its existence it
is the same: and so if the composition be of distinct substances and
different modes, the same rule holds. Whereby it will appear, that the
difficulty or obscurity that has been about this matter rather rises
from the names ill-used, than from any obscurity in things themselves.
For whatever makes the specific idea to which the name is applied, if
that idea be steadily kept to, the distinction of anything into the
same and divers will easily be conceived, and there can arise no doubt
about it.

31. Continuance of that which we have made to be our complex idea of
man makes the same man.

For, supposing a rational spirit be the idea of a MAN, it is easy to
know what is the same man, viz. the same spirit—whether separate or in
a body—will be the SAME MAN. Supposing a rational spirit vitally united
to a body of a certain conformation of parts to make a man; whilst that
rational spirit, with that vital conformation of parts, though
continued in a fleeting successive body, remains, it will be the SAME
MAN. But if to any one the idea of a man be but the vital union of
parts in a certain shape; as long as that vital union and shape remain
in a concrete, no otherwise the same but by a continued succession of
fleeting particles, it will be the SAME MAN. For, whatever be the
composition whereof the complex idea is made, whenever existence makes
it one particular thing under any denomination, THE SAME EXISTENCE
CONTINUED preserves it the SAME individual under the same denomination.




CHAPTER XXVIII.
OF OTHER RELATIONS.


1. Ideas of Proportional relations.

BESIDES the before-mentioned occasions of time, place, and causality of
comparing or referring things one to another, there are, as I have
said, infinite others, some whereof I shall mention.

First, The first I shall name is some one simple idea, which, being
capable of parts or degrees, affords an occasion of comparing the
subjects wherein it is to one another, in respect of that simple idea,
v.g. whiter, sweeter, equal, more, &c. These relations depending on the
equality and excess of the same simple idea, in several subjects, may
be called, if one will, PROPORTIONAL; and that these are only
conversant about those simple ideas received from sensation or
reflection is so evident that nothing need be said to evince it.

2. Natural relation.

Secondly, Another occasion of comparing things together, or considering
one thing, so as to include in that consideration some other thing, is
the circumstances of their origin or beginning; which being not
afterwards to be altered, make the relations depending thereon as
lasting as the subjects to which they belong, v.g. father and son,
brothers, cousin-germans, &c., which have their relations by one
community of blood, wherein they partake in several degrees:
countrymen, i.e. those who were born in the same country or tract of
ground; and these I call NATURAL RELATIONS: wherein we may observe,
that mankind have fitted their notions and words to the use of common
life, and not to the truth and extent of things. For it is certain,
that, in reality, the relation is the same betwixt the begetter and the
begotten, in the several races of other animals as well as men; but yet
it is seldom said, this bull is the grandfather of such a calf, or that
two pigeons are cousin-germans. It is very convenient that, by distinct
names, these relations should be observed and marked out in mankind,
there being occasion, both in laws and other communications one with
another, to mention and take notice of men under these relations: from
whence also arise the obligations of several duties amongst men:
whereas, in brutes, men having very little or no cause to mind these
relations, they have not thought fit to give them distinct and peculiar
names. This, by the way, may give us some light into the different
state and growth of languages; which being suited only to the
convenience of communication, are proportioned to the notions men have,
and the commerce of thoughts familiar amongst them; and not to the
reality or extent of things, nor to the various respects might be found
among them; nor the different abstract considerations might be framed
about them. Where they had no philosophical notions, there they had no
terms to express them: and it is no wonder men should have framed no
names for those things they found no occasion to discourse of. From
whence it is easy to imagine why, as in some countries, they may have
not so much as the name for a horse; and in others, where they are more
careful of the pedigrees of their horses, than of their own, that there
they may have not only names for particular horses, but also of their
several relations of kindred one to another.

3. Ideas of Instituted or Voluntary relations.

Thirdly, Sometimes the foundation of considering things with reference
to one another, is some act whereby any one comes by a moral right,
power, or obligation to do something. Thus, a general is one that hath
power to command an army, and an army under a general is a collection
of armed men obliged to obey one man. A citizen, or a burgher, is one
who has a right to certain privileges in this or that place. All this
sort depending upon men’s wills, or agreement in society, I call
INSTITUTED, or VOLUNTARY; and may be distinguished from the natural, in
that they are most, if not all of them, some way or other alterable,
and separable from the persons to whom they have sometimes belonged,
though neither of the substances, so related, be destroyed. Now, though
these are all reciprocal, as well as the rest, and contain in them a
reference of two things one to the other; yet, because one of the two
things often wants a relative name, importing that reference, men
usually take no notice of it, and the relation is commonly overlooked:
v. g. a patron and client are easily allowed to be relations, but a
constable or dictator are not so readily at first hearing considered as
such. Because there is no peculiar name for those who are under the
command of a dictator or constable, expressing a relation to either of
them; though it be certain that either of them hath a certain power
over some others, and so is so far related to them, as well as a patron
is to his client, or general to his army.

4. Ideas of Moral relations.

Fourthly, There is another sort of relation, which is the conformity or
disagreement men’s VOLUNTARY ACTIONS have to a RULE to which they are
referred, and by which they are judged of; which, I think, may be
called MORAL RELATION, as being that which denominates our moral
actions, and deserves well to be examined; there being no part of
knowledge wherein we should be more careful to get determined ideas,
and avoid, as much as may be, obscurity and confusion. Human actions,
when with their various ends, objects, manners, and circumstances, they
are framed into distinct complex ideas, are, as has been shown, so many
MIXED MODES, a great part whereof have names annexed to them. Thus,
supposing gratitude to be a readiness to acknowledge and return
kindness received; polygamy to be the having more wives than one at
once: when we frame these notions thus in our minds, we have there so
many determined ideas of mixed modes. But this is not all that concerns
our actions: it is not enough to have determined ideas of them, and to
know what names belong to such and such combinations of ideas. We have
a further and greater concernment, and that is, to know whether such
actions, so made up, are morally good or bad.

5. Moral Good and Evil.

Good and evil, as hath been shown, (B. II. chap. xx. Section 2, and
chap. xxi. Section 43,) are nothing but pleasure or pain, or that which
occasions or procures pleasure or pain to us. MORAL GOOD AND EVIL,
then, is only THE CONFORMITY OR DISAGREEMENT OF OUR VOLUNTARY ACTIONS
TO SOME LAW, WHEREBY GOOD OR EVIL IS DRAWN ON US, FROM THE WILL AND
POWER OF THE LAW-MAKER; which good and evil, pleasure or pain,
attending our observance or breach of the law by the decree of the
law-maker, is that we call REWARD and PUNISHMENT.

6. Moral Rules.

Of these moral rules or laws, to which men generally refer, and by
which they judge of the rectitude or gravity of their actions, there
seem to me to be THREE SORTS, with their three different enforcements,
or rewards and punishments. For, since it would be utterly in vain to
suppose a rule set to the free actions of men, without annexing to it
some enforcement of good and evil to determine his will, we must,
wherever we suppose a law, suppose also some reward or punishment
annexed to that law. It would be in vain for one intelligent being to
set a rule to the actions of another, if he had it not in his power to
reward the compliance with, and punish deviation from his rule, by some
good and evil, that is not the natural product and consequence of the
action itself. For that, being a natural convenience or inconvenience,
would operate of itself, without a law. This, if I mistake not, is the
true nature of all law, properly so called.

7. Laws.

The laws that men generally refer their actions to, to judge of their
rectitude or obliquity, seem to me to be these three:—1. The DIVINE
law. 2. The CIVIL law. 3. The law of OPINION or REPUTATION, if I may so
call it. By the relation they bear to the first of these, men judge
whether their actions are sins or duties; by the second, whether they
be criminal or innocent; and by the third, whether they be virtues or
vices.

8. Divine Law the Measure of Sin and Duty.

First, the DIVINE LAW, whereby that law which God has set to the
actions of men,—whether promulgated to them by the light of nature, or
the voice of revelation. That God has given a rule whereby men should
govern themselves, I think there is nobody so brutish as to deny. He
has a right to do it; we are his creatures: he has goodness and wisdom
to direct our actions to that which is best: and he has power to
enforce it by rewards and punishments of infinite weight and duration
in another life; for nobody can take us out of his hands. This is the
only true touchstone of moral rectitude; and, by comparing them to this
law, it is that men judge of the most considerable moral good or evil
of their actions; that is, whether, as duties or sins, they are like to
procure them happiness or misery from the hands of the ALMIGHTY.

9. Civil Law the Measure of Crimes and Innocence.

Secondly, the CIVIL LAW—the rule set by the commonwealth to the actions
of those who belong to it—is another rule to which men refer their
actions; to judge whether they be criminal or no. This law nobody
overlooks: the rewards and punishments that enforce it being ready at
hand, and suitable to the power that makes it: which is the force of
the Commonwealth, engaged to protect the lives, liberties, and
possessions of those who live according to its laws, and has power to
take away life, liberty, or goods, from him who disobeys; which is the
punishment of offences committed against his law.

10. Philosophical Law the Measure of Virtue and Vice.

Thirdly, the LAW OF OPINION OR REPUTATION. Virtue and vice are names
pretended and supposed everywhere to stand for actions in their own
nature right and wrong: and as far as they really are so applied, they
so far are coincident with the divine law above mentioned. But yet,
whatever is pretended, this is visible, that these names, virtue and
vice, in the particular instances of their application, through the
several nations and societies of men in the world, are constantly
attributed only to such actions as in each country and society are in
reputation or discredit. Nor is it to be thought strange, that men
everywhere should give the name of virtue to those actions, which
amongst them are judged praiseworthy; and call that vice, which they
account blamable: since otherwise they would condemn themselves, if
they should think anything right, to which they allowed not
commendation, anything wrong, which they let pass without blame. Thus
the measure of what is everywhere called and esteemed virtue and vice
is this approbation or dislike, praise or blame, which, by a secret and
tacit consent, establishes itself in the several societies, tribes, and
clubs of men in the world: whereby several actions come to find credit
or disgrace amongst them, according to the judgment, maxims, or fashion
of that place. For, though men uniting into politic societies, have
resigned up to the public the disposing of all their force, so that
they cannot employ it against any fellow-citizens any further than the
law of the country directs: yet they retain still the power of thinking
well or ill, approving or disapproving of the actions of those whom
they live amongst, and converse with: and by this approbation and
dislike they establish amongst themselves what they will call virtue
and vice.

11. The Measure that Man commonly apply to determine what they call
Virtue and Vice.

That this is the common MEASURE of virtue and vice, will appear to any
one who considers, that, though that passes for vice in one country
which is counted a virtue, or at least not vice, in another, yet
everywhere virtue and praise, vice and blame, go together. Virtue is
everywhere, that which is thought praiseworthy; and nothing else but
that which has the allowance of public esteem is called virtue. Virtue
and praise are so united, that they are called often by the same name.
Sunt sua praemia laudi, says Virgil; and so Cicero, Nihil habet natura
praestantius, quam honestatem, quam laudem, quam dignitatem, quam
decus, which he tells you are all names for the same thing. This is the
language of the heathen philosophers, who well understood wherein their
notions of virtue and vice consisted. And though perhaps, by the
different temper, education, fashion, maxims, or interest of different
sorts of men, it fell out, that what was thought praiseworthy in one
place, escaped not censure in another; and so in different societies,
virtues and vices were changed; yet, as to the main, they for the most
part kept the same everywhere. For, since nothing can be more natural
than to encourage with esteem and reputation that wherein every one
finds his advantage, and to blame and discountenance the contrary; it
is no wonder that esteem and discredit, virtue and vice, should, in a
great measure, everywhere correspond with the unchangeable rule of
right and wrong, which the law of God hath established; there being
nothing that so directly and visibly secures and advances the general
good of mankind in this world, as obedience to the laws he had set
them, and nothing that breeds such mischiefs and confusion, as the
neglect of them. And therefore men, without renouncing all sense and
reason, and their own interest, which they are so constantly true to,
could not generally mistake, in placing their commendation and blame on
that side that really deserved it not. Nay, even those men whose
practice was otherwise, failed not to give their approbation right, few
being depraved to that degree as not to condemn, at least in others,
the faults they themselves were guilty of; whereby, even in the
corruption of manners, the true boundaries of the law of nature, which
ought to be the rule of virtue and vice, were pretty well preferred. So
that even the exhortations of inspired teachers, have not feared to
appeal to common repute: ‘Whatsoever is lovely, whatsoever is of good
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise,’ &c. (Phil. iv.
8.)

12. Its Inforcement is Commendation and Discredit.

If any one shall imagine that I have forgot my own notion of a law,
when I make the law, whereby men judge of virtue and vice, to be
nothing else but the consent of private men, who have not authority
enough to make a law: especially wanting that which is so necessary and
essential to a law, a power to enforce it: I think I may say, that he
who imagines commendation and disgrace not to be strong motives to men
to accommodate themselves to the opinions and rules of those with whom
they converse, seems little skilled in the nature or history of
mankind: the greatest part whereof we shall find to govern themselves
chiefly, if not solely, by this LAW OF FASHION; and so they do that
which keeps them in reputation with their company, little regard the
laws of God, or the magistrate. The penalties that attend the breach of
God’s laws some, nay perhaps most men, seldom seriously reflect on: and
amongst those that do, many, whilst they break the law, entertain
thoughts of future reconciliation, and making their peace for such
breaches. And as to the punishments due from the laws of the
commonwealth, they frequently flatter themselves with the hopes of
impunity. But no man escapes the punishment of their censure and
dislike, who offends against the fashion and opinion of the company he
keeps, and would recommend himself to. Nor is there one of ten
thousand, who is stiff and insensible enough, to bear up under the
constant dislike and condemnation of his own club. He must be of a
strange and unusual constitution, who can content himself to live in
constant disgrace and disrepute with his own particular society.
Solitude many men have sought, and been reconciled to: but nobody that
has the least thought or sense of a man about him, can live in society
under the constant dislike and ill opinion of his familiars, and those
he converses with. This is a burden too heavy for human sufferance: and
he must be made up of irreconcileable contradictions, who can take
pleasure in company, and yet be insensible of contempt and disgrace
from his companions.

13. These three Laws the Rules of moral Good and Evil.

These three then, first, the law of God; secondly, the law of politic
societies; thirdly, the law of fashion, or private censure, are those
to which men variously compare their actions: and it is by their
conformity to one of these laws that they take their measures, when
they would judge of their moral rectitude, and denominate their actions
good or bad.

14. Morality is the Relation of Voluntary Actions to these Rules.

Whether the rule to which, as to a touchstone, we bring our voluntary
actions, to examine them by, and try their goodness, and accordingly to
name them, which is, as it were, the mark of the value we set upon
them: whether, I say, we take that rule from the fashion of the
country, or the will of a law-maker, the mind is easily able to observe
the relation any action hath to it, and to judge whether the action
agrees or disagrees with the rule; and so hath a notion of moral
goodness or evil, which is either conformity or not conformity of any
action to that rule: and therefore is often called moral rectitude.
This rule being nothing but a collection of several simple ideas, the
conformity thereto is but so ordering the action, that the simple ideas
belonging to it may correspond to those which the law requires. And
thus we see how moral beings and notions are founded on, and terminated
in, these simple ideas we have received from sensation or reflection.
For example: let us consider the complex idea we signify by the word
murder: and when we have taken it asunder, and examined all the
particulars, we shall find them to amount to a collection of simple
ideas derived from reflection or sensation, viz. First, from REFLECTION
on the operations of our own minds, we have the ideas of willing,
considering, purposing beforehand, malice, or wishing ill to another;
and also of life, or perception, and self-motion. Secondly, from
SENSATION we have the collection of those simple sensible ideas which
are to be found in a man, and of some action, whereby we put an end to
perception and motion in the man; all which simple ideas are
comprehended in the word murder. This collection of simple ideas, being
found by me to agree or disagree with the esteem of the country I have
been bred in, and to be held by most men there worthy praise or blame,
I call the action virtuous or vicious: if I have the will of a supreme
invisible Lawgiver for my rule, then, as I supposed the action
commanded or forbidden by God, I call it good or evil, sin or duty: and
if I compare it to the civil law, the rule made by the legislative
power of the country, I call it lawful or unlawful, a crime or no
crime. So that whencesoever we take the rule of moral actions; or by
what standard soever we frame in our minds the ideas of virtues or
vices, they consist only, and are made up of collections of simple
ideas, which we originally received from sense or reflection: and their
rectitude or obliquity consists in the agreement or disagreement with
those patterns prescribed by some law.

15. Moral actions may be regarded either absolutely, or as ideas of
relation.

To conceive rightly of moral actions, we must take notice of them under
this two-fold consideration. First, as they are in themselves, each
made up of such a collection of simple ideas. Thus drunkenness, or
lying, signify such or such a collection of simple ideas, which I call
mixed modes: and in this sense they are as much POSITIVE ABSOLUTE
ideas, as the drinking of a horse, or speaking of a parrot. Secondly,
our actions are considered as good, bad, or indifferent; and in this
respect they are RELATIVE, it being their conformity to, or
disagreement with some rule that makes them to be regular or irregular,
good or bad; and so, as far as they are compared with a rule, and
thereupon denominated, they come under relation. Thus the challenging
and fighting with a man, as it is a certain positive mode, or
particular sort of action, by particular ideas, distinguished from all
others, is called DUELLING: which, when considered in relation to the
law of God, will deserve the name of sin; to the law of fashion, in
some countries, valour and virtue; and to the municipal laws of some
governments, a capital crime. In this case, when the positive mode has
one name, and another name as it stands in relation to the law, the
distinction may as easily be observed as it is in substances, where one
name, v.g. MAN, is used to signify the thing; another, v.g. FATHER, to
signify the relation.

16. The Denominations of Actions often mislead us.

But because very frequently the positive idea of the action, and its
moral relation, are comprehended together under one name, and the same
word made use of to express both the mode or action, and its moral
rectitude or obliquity: therefore the relation itself is less taken
notice of; and there is often no distinction made between the positive
idea of the action, and the reference it has to a rule. By which
confusion of these two distinct considerations under one term, those
who yield too easily to the impressions of sounds, and are forward to
take names for things, are often misled in their judgment of actions.
Thus, the taking from another what is his, without his knowledge or
allowance, is properly called STEALING: but that name, being commonly
understood to signify also the moral gravity of the action, and to
denote its contrariety to the law, men are apt to condemn whatever they
hear called stealing, as an ill action, disagreeing with the rule of
right. And yet the private taking away his sword from a madman, to
prevent his doing mischief, though it be properly denominated stealing,
as the name of such a mixed mode; yet when compared to the law of God,
and considered in its relation to that supreme rule, it is no sin or
transgression, though the name stealing ordinarily carries such an
intimation with it.

17. Relations innumerable, and only the most considerable here
mentioned.

And thus much for the relation of human actions to a law, which,
therefore, I call MORAL RELATIONS.

It would make a volume to go over all sorts of RELATIONS: it is not,
therefore, to be expected that I should here mention them all. It
suffices to our present purpose to show by these, what the ideas are we
have of this comprehensive consideration called RELATION. Which is so
various, and the occasions of it so many, (as many as there can be of
comparing things one to another,) that it is not very easy to reduce it
to rules, or under just heads. Those I have mentioned, I think, are
some of the most considerable; and such as may serve to let us see from
whence we get our ideas of relations, and wherein they are founded. But
before I quit this argument, from what has been said give me leave to
observe:

18. All Relations terminate in simple Ideas.

First, That it is evident, that all relation terminates in, and is
ultimately founded on, those simple ideas we have got from sensation or
reflection: so that all we have in our thoughts ourselves, (if we think
of anything, or have any meaning,) or would signify to others, when we
use words standing for relations, is nothing but some simple ideas, or
collections of simple ideas, compared one with another. This is so
manifest in that sort called proportional, that nothing can be more.
For when a man says ‘honey is sweeter than wax,’ it is plain that his
thoughts in this relation terminate in this simple idea, sweetness;
which is equally true of all the rest: though, where they are
compounded, or decompounded, the simple ideas they are made up of, are,
perhaps, seldom taken notice of: v.g. when the word father is
mentioned: first, there is meant that particular species, or collective
idea, signified by the word man; secondly, those sensible simple ideas,
signified by the word generation; and, thirdly, the effects of it, and
all the simple ideas signified by the word child. So the word friend,
being taken for a man who loves and is ready to do good to another, has
all these following ideas to the making of it up: first, all the simple
ideas, comprehended in the word man, or intelligent being; secondly,
the idea of love; thirdly, the idea of readiness or disposition;
fourthly, the idea of action, which is any kind of thought or motion;
fifthly, the idea of good, which signifies anything that may advance
his happiness, and terminates at last, if examined, in particular
simple ideas, of which the word good in general signifies any one; but,
if removed from all simple ideas quite, it signifies nothing at all.
And thus also all moral words terminate at last, though perhaps more
remotely, in a collection of simple ideas: the immediate signification
of relative words, being very often other supposed known relations;
which, if traced one to another, still end in simple ideas.

19. We have ordinarily as clear a Notion of the Relation, as of the
simple ideas in things on which it is founded.

Secondly, That in relations, we have for the most part, if not always,
as clear a notion of THE RELATION as we have of THOSE SIMPLE IDEAS
WHEREIN IT IS FOUNDED: agreement or disagreement, whereon relation
depends, being things whereof we have commonly as clear ideas as of any
other whatsoever; it being but the distinguishing simple ideas, or
their degrees one from another, without which we could have no distinct
knowledge at all. For, if I have a clear idea of sweetness, light, or
extension, I have, too, of equal, or more, or less, of each of these:
if I know what it is for one man to be born of a woman, viz. Sempronia,
I know what it is for another man to be born of the same woman
Sempronia; and so have as clear a notion of brothers as of births, and
perhaps clearer. For if I believed that Sempronia digged Titus out of
the parsley-bed, (as they used to tell children,) and thereby became
his mother; and that afterwards, in the same manner, she digged Caius
out of the parsley-bed, I had as clear a notion of the relation of
brothers between them, as if I had all the skill of a midwife: the
notion that the same woman contributed, as mother, equally to their
births, (though I were ignorant or mistaken in the manner of it,) being
that on which I grounded the relation; and that they agreed in the
circumstance of birth, let it be what it will. The comparing them then
in their descent from the same person, without knowing the particular
circumstances of that descent, is enough to found my notion of their
having, or not having, the relation of brothers. But though the ideas
of PARTICULAR RELATIONS are capable of being as clear and distinct in
the minds of those who will duly consider them as those of mixed modes,
and more determinate than those of substances: yet the names belonging
to relation are often of as doubtful and uncertain signification as
those of substances or mixed modes; and much more than those of simple
ideas. Because relative words, being the marks of this comparison,
which is made only by men’s thoughts, and is an idea only in men’s
minds, men frequently apply them to different comparisons of things,
according to their own imaginations; which do not always correspond
with those of others using the same name.

20. The Notion of Relation is the same, whether the Rule any Action is
compared to be true or false.

Thirdly, That in these I call MORAL RELATIONS, I have a true notion of
relation, by comparing the action with the rule, whether the rule be
true or false. For if I measure anything by a yard, I know whether the
thing I measure be longer or shorter than that supposed yard, though
perhaps the yard I measure by be not exactly the standard: which indeed
is another inquiry. For though the rule be erroneous, and I mistaken in
it; yet the agreement or disagreement observable in that which I
compare with, makes me perceive the relation. Though, measuring by a
wrong rule, I shall thereby be brought to judge amiss of its moral
rectitude; because I have tried it by that which is not the true rule:
yet I am not mistaken in the relation which that action bears to that
rule I compare it to, which is agreement or disagreement.




CHAPTER XXIX.
OF CLEAR AND OBSCURE, DISTINCT AND CONFUSED IDEAS.


1. Ideas, some clear and distinct, others obscure and confused.

Having shown the original of our ideas, and taken a view of their
several sorts; considered the difference between the simple and the
complex; and observed how the complex ones are divided into those of
modes, substances, and relations—all which, I think, is necessary to be
done by any one who would acquaint himself thoroughly with the progress
of the mind, in its apprehension and knowledge of things—it will,
perhaps, be thought I have dwelt long enough upon the examination of
IDEAS. I must, nevertheless, crave leave to offer some few other
considerations concerning them.

The first is, that some are CLEAR and others OBSCURE; some DISTINCT and
others CONFUSED.

2. Clear and obscure explained by Sight.

The perception of the mind being most aptly explained by words relating
to the sight, we shall best understand what is meant by CLEAR and
OBSCURE in our ideas, by reflecting on what we call clear and obscure
in the objects of sight. Light being that which discovers to us visible
objects, we give the name of OBSCURE to that which is not placed in a
light sufficient to discover minutely to us the figure and colours
which are observable in it, and which, in a better light, would be
discernible. In like manner, our simple ideas are CLEAR, when they are
such as the objects themselves from whence they were taken did or
might, in a well-ordered sensation or perception, present them. Whilst
the memory retains them thus, and can produce them to the mind whenever
it has occasion to consider them, they are clear ideas. So far as they
either want anything of the original exactness, or have lost any of
their first freshness, and are, as it were, faded or tarnished by time,
so far are they obscure. Complex ideas, as they are made up of simple
ones, so they are clear, when the ideas that go to their composition
are clear, and the number and order of those simple ideas that are the
ingredients of any complex one is determinate and certain.

3. Causes of Obscurity.

The causes of obscurity, in simple ideas, seem to be either dull
organs; or very slight and transient impressions made by the objects;
or else a weakness in the memory, not able to retain them as received.
For to return again to visible objects, to help us to apprehend this
matter. If the organs, or faculties of perception, like wax
over-hardened with cold, will not receive the impression of the seal,
from the usual impulse wont to imprint it; or, like wax of a temper too
soft, will not hold it well, when well imprinted; or else supposing the
wax of a temper fit, but the seal not applied with a sufficient force
to make a clear impression: in any of these cases, the print left by
the seal will be obscure. This, I suppose, needs no application to make
it plainer.

4. Distinct and confused, what.

As a clear idea is that whereof the mind has such a full and evident
perception, as it does receive from an outward object operating duly on
a well-disposed organ, so a DISTINCT idea is that wherein the mind
perceives a difference from all other; and a CONFUSED idea is such an
one as is not sufficiently distinguishable from another, from which it
ought to be different.

5. Objection.

If no idea be confused, but such as is not sufficiently distinguishable
from another from which it should be different, it will be hard, may
any one say, to find anywhere a CONFUSED idea. For, let any idea be as
it will, it can be no other but such as the mind perceives it to be;
and that very perception sufficiently distinguishes it from all other
ideas, which cannot be other, i.e. different, without being perceived
to be so. No idea, therefore, can be undistinguishable from another
from which it ought to be different, unless you would have it different
from itself: for from all other it is evidently different.

6. Confusion of Ideas is in Reference to their Names.

To remove this difficulty, and to help us to conceive aright what it is
that makes the confusion ideas are at any time chargeable with, we must
consider, that things ranked under distinct names are supposed
different enough to be distinguished, that so each sort by its peculiar
name may be marked, and discoursed of apart upon any occasion: and
there is nothing more evident, than that the greatest part of different
names are supposed to stand for different things. Now every idea a man
has, being visibly what it is, and distinct from all other ideas but
itself; that which makes it confused, is, when it is such that it may
as well be called by another name as that which it is expressed by; the
difference which keeps the things (to be ranked under those two
different names) distinct, and makes some of them belong rather to the
one and some of them to the other of those names, being left out; and
so the distinction, which was intended to be kept up by those different
names, is quite lost.

7. Defaults which make this Confusion.

The defaults which usually occasion this confusion, I think, are
chiefly these following:

First, complex ideas made up of too few simple ones.

First, when any complex idea (for it is complex ideas that are most
liable to confusion) is made up of too small a number of simple ideas,
and such only as are common to other things, whereby the differences
that make it deserve a different name, are left out. Thus, he that has
an idea made up of barely the simple ones of a beast with spots, has
but a confused idea of a leopard; it not being thereby sufficiently
distinguished from a lynx, and several other sorts of beasts that are
spotted. So that such an idea, though it hath the peculiar name
leopard, is not distinguishable from those designed by the names lynx
or panther, and may as well come under the name lynx as leopard. How
much the custom of defining of words by general terms contributes to
make the ideas we would express by them confused and undetermined, I
leave others to consider. This is evident, that confused ideas are such
as render the use of words uncertain, and take away the benefit of
distinct names. When the ideas, for which we use different terms, have
not a difference answerable to their distinct names, and so cannot be
distinguished by them, there it is that they are truly confused.

8. Secondly, or their simple ones jumbled disorderly together.

Secondly, Another fault which makes our ideas confused is, when, though
the particulars that make up any idea are in number enough, yet they
are so jumbled together, that it is not easily discernible whether it
more belongs to the name that is given it than to any other. There is
nothing properer to make us conceive this confusion than a sort of
pictures, usually shown as surprising pieces of art, wherein the
colours, as they are laid by the pencil on the table itself, mark out
very odd and unusual figures, and have no discernible order in their
position. This draught, thus made up of parts wherein no symmetry nor
order appears, is in itself no more a confused thing, than the picture
of a cloudy sky; wherein, though there be as little order of colours or
figures to be found, yet nobody thinks it a confused picture. What is
it, then, that makes it be thought confused, since the want of symmetry
does not? As it is plain it does not: for another draught made barely
in imitation of this could not be called confused. I answer, That which
makes it be thought confused is, the applying it to some name to which
it does no more discernibly belong than to some other: v.g. when it is
said to be the picture of a man, or Caesar, then any one with reason
counts it confused; because it is not discernible in that state to
belong more to the name man, or Caesar, than to the name baboon, or
Pompey: which are supposed to stand for different ideas from those
signified by man, or Caesar. But when a cylindrical mirror, placed
right, had reduced those irregular lines on the table into their due
order and proportion, then the confusion ceases, and the eye presently
sees that it is a man, or Caesar; i.e. that it belongs to those names;
and that it is sufficiently distinguishable from a baboon, or Pompey;
i.e. from the ideas signified by those names. Just thus it is with our
ideas, which are as it were the pictures of things. No one of these
mental draughts, however the parts are put together, can be called
confused (for they are plainly discernible as they are) till it be
ranked under some ordinary name to which it cannot be discerned to
belong, any more than it does to some other name of an allowed
different signification.

9. Thirdly, or their simple ones mutable and undetermined.

Thirdly, A third defect that frequently gives the name of confused to
our ideas, is, when any one of them is uncertain and undetermined. Thus
we may observe men who, not forbearing to use the ordinary words of
their language till they have learned their precise signification,
change the idea they make this or that term stand for, almost as often
as they use it. He that does this out of uncertainty of what he should
leave out, or put into his idea of CHURCH, or IDOLATRY, every time he
thinks of either, and holds not steady to any one precise combination
of ideas that makes it up, is said to have a confused idea of idolatry
or the church: though this be still for the same reason as the former,
viz. because a mutable idea (if we will allow it to be one idea) cannot
belong to one name rather than another, and so loses the distinction
that distinct names are designed for.

10. Confusion without Reference to Names, hardly conceivable.

By what has been said, we may observe how much NAMES, as supposed
steady signs of things, and by their difference to stand for, and keep
things distinct that in themselves are different, are the occasion of
denominating ideas distinct or confused, by a secret and unobserved
reference the mind makes of its ideas to such names. This perhaps will
be fuller understood, after what I say of Words in the third Book has
been read and considered. But without taking notice of such a reference
of ideas to distinct names, as the signs of distinct things, it will be
hard to say what a confused idea is. And therefore when a man designs,
by any name, a sort of things, or any one particular thing, distinct
from all others, the complex idea he annexes to that name is the more
distinct, the more particular the ideas are, and the greater and more
determinate the number and order of them is, whereof it is made up.
For, the more it has of these, the more it has still of the perceivable
differences, whereby it is kept separate and distinct from all ideas
belonging to other names, even those that approach nearest to it, and
thereby all confusion with them is avoided.

11. Confusion concerns always two Ideas.

Confusion making it a difficulty to separate two things that should be
separated, concerns always two ideas; and those most which most
approach one another. Whenever, therefore, we suspect any idea to be
confused, we must examine what other it is in danger to be confounded
with, or which it cannot easily be separated from; and that will always
be found an idea belonging to another name, and so should be a
different thing, from which yet it is not sufficiently distinct: being
either the same with it, or making a part of it, or at least as
properly called by that name as the other it is ranked under; and so
keeps not that difference from that other idea which the different
names import.

12. Causes of confused Ideas.

This, I think, is the confusion proper to ideas; which still carries
with it a secret reference to names. At least, if there be any other
confusion of ideas, this is that which most of all disorders men’s
thoughts and discourses: ideas, as ranked under names, being those that
for the most part men reason of within themselves, and always those
which they commune about with others. And therefore where there are
supposed two different ideas, marked by two different names, which are
not as distinguishable as the sounds that stand for them, there never
fails to be confusion; and where any ideas are distinct as the ideas of
those two sounds they are marked by, there can be between them no
confusion. The way to prevent it is to collect and unite into one
complex idea, as precisely as is possible, all those ingredients
whereby it is differenced from others; and to them, so united in a
determinate number and order, apply steadily the same name. But this
neither accommodating men’s ease or vanity, nor serving any design but
that of naked truth, which is not always the thing aimed at, such
exactness is rather to be wished than hoped for. And since the loose
application of names, to undetermined, variable, and almost no ideas,
serves both to cover our own ignorance, as well as to perplex and
confound others, which goes for learning and superiority in knowledge,
it is no wonder that most men should use it themselves, whilst they
complain of it in others. Though I think no small part of the confusion
to be found in the notions of men might, by care and ingenuity, be
avoided, yet I am far from concluding it everywhere wilful. Some ideas
are so complex, and made up of so many parts, that the memory does not
easily retain the very same precise combination of simple ideas under
one name: much less are we able constantly to divine for what precise
complex idea such a name stands in another man’s use of it. From the
first of these, follows confusion in a man’s own reasonings and
opinions within himself; from the latter, frequent confusion in
discoursing and arguing with others. But having more at large treated
of Words, their defects, and abuses, in the following Book, I shall
here say no more of it.

13. Complex Ideas may be distinct in one Part, and confused in another.

Our complex ideas, being made up of collections, and so variety of
simple ones, may accordingly be very clear and distinct in one part,
and very obscure and confused in another. In a man who speaks of a
chiliaedron, or a body of a thousand sides, the ideas of the figure may
be very confused, though that of the number be very distinct; so that
he being able to discourse and demonstrate concerning that part of his
complex idea which depends upon the number of thousand, he is apt to
think he has a distinct idea of a chiliaedron; though it be plain he
has no precise idea of its figure, so as to distinguish it, by that,
from one that has but 999 sides: the not observing whereof causes no
small error in men’s thoughts, and confusion in their discourses.

14. This, if not heeded, causes Confusion in our Arguings.

He that thinks he has a distinct idea of the figure of a chiliaedron,
let him for trial sake take another parcel of the same uniform matter,
viz. gold or wax of an equal bulk, and make it into a figure of 999
sides. He will, I doubt not, be able to distinguish these two ideas one
from another, by the number of sides; and reason and argue distinctly
about them, whilst he keeps his thoughts and reasoning to that part
only of these ideas which is contained in their numbers; as that the
sides of the one could be divided into two equal numbers, and of the
others not, &c. But when he goes about to distinguish them by their
figure, he will there be presently at a loss, and not be able, I think,
to frame in his mind two ideas, one of them distinct from the other, by
the bare figure of these two pieces of gold; as he could, if the same
parcels of gold were made one into a cube, the other a figure of five
sides. In which incomplete ideas, we are very apt to impose on
ourselves, and wrangle with others, especially where they have
particular and familiar names. For, being satisfied in that part of the
idea which we have clear; and the name which is familiar to us, being
applied to the whole, containing that part also which is imperfect and
obscure, we are apt to use it for that confused part, and draw
deductions from it in the obscure part of its signification, as
confidently as we do from the other.

15. Instance in Eternity.

Having frequently in our mouths the name Eternity, we are apt to think
we have a positive comprehensive idea of it, which is as much as to
say, that there is no part of that duration which is not clearly
contained in our idea. It is true that he that thinks so may have a
clear idea of duration; he may also have a clear idea of a very great
length of duration; he may also have a clear idea of the comparison of
that great one with still a greater: but it not being possible for him
to include in his idea of any duration, let it be as great as it will,
the WHOLE EXTENT TOGETHER OF A DURATION, WHERE HE SUPPOSES NO END, that
part of his idea, which is still beyond the bounds of that large
duration he represents to his own thoughts, is very obscure and
undetermined. And hence it is that in disputes and reasonings
concerning eternity, or any other infinite, we are very apt to blunder,
and involve ourselves in manifest absurdities.

16. Infinite Divisibility of Matter.

In matter, we have no clear ideas of the smallness of parts much beyond
the smallest that occur to any of our senses: and therefore, when we
talk of the divisibility of matter IN INFINITUM, though we have clear
ideas of division and divisibility, and have also clear ideas of parts
made out of a whole by division; yet we have but very obscure and
confused ideas of corpuscles, or minute bodies, so to be divided, when,
by former divisions, they are reduced to a smallness much exceeding the
perception of any of our senses; and so all that we have clear and
distinct ideas of is of what division in general or abstractedly is,
and the relation of TOTUM and PARS: but of the bulk of the body, to be
thus infinitely divided after certain progressions, I think, we have no
clear nor distinct idea at all. For I ask any one, whether, taking the
smallest atom of dust he ever saw, he has any distinct idea (bating
still the number, which concerns not extension) betwixt the 100,000th
and the 1,000,000th part of it. Or if he think he can refine his ideas
to that degree, without losing sight of them, let him add ten cyphers
to each of those numbers. Such a degree of smallness is not
unreasonable to be supposed; since a division carried on so far brings
it no nearer the end of infinite division, than the first division into
two halves does. I must confess, for my part, I have no clear distinct
ideas of the different bulk or extension of those bodies, having but a
very obscure one of either of them. So that, I think, when we talk of
division of bodies in infinitum, our idea of their distinct bulks,
which is the subject and foundation of division, comes, after a little
progression, to be confounded, and almost lost in obscurity. For that
idea which is to represent only bigness must be very obscure and
confused, which we cannot distinguish from one ten times as big, but
only by number: so that we have clear distinct ideas, we may say, of
ten and one, but no distinct ideas of two such extensions. It is plain
from hence, that, when we talk of infinite divisibility of body or
extension, our distinct and clear ideas are only of numbers: but the
clear distinct ideas of extension, after some progress of division, are
quite lost; and of such minute parts we have no distinct ideas at all;
but it returns, as all our ideas of infinite do, at last to that of
NUMBER ALWAYS TO BE ADDED; but thereby never amounts to any distinct
idea of ACTUAL INFINITE PARTS. We have, it is true, a clear idea of
division, as often as we think of it; but thereby we have no more a
clear idea of infinite parts in matter, than we have a clear idea of an
infinite number, by being able still to add new numbers to any assigned
numbers we have: endless divisibility giving us no more a clear and
distinct idea of actually infinite parts, than endless addibility (if I
may so speak) gives us a clear and distinct idea of an actually
infinite number: they both being only in a power still of increasing
the number, be it already as great as it will. So that of what remains
to be added (WHEREIN CONSISTS THE INFINITY) we have but an obscure,
imperfect, and confused idea; from or about which we can argue or
reason with no certainty or clearness, no more than we can in
arithmetic, about a number of which we have no such distinct idea as we
have of 4 or 100; but only this relative obscure one, that, compared to
any other, it is still bigger: and we have no more a clear positive
idea of it, when we [dropped line*] than if we should say it is bigger
than 40 or 4: 400,000,000 having no nearer a proportion to the end of
addition or number than 4. For he that adds only 4 to 4, and so
proceeds, shall as soon come to the end of all addition, as he that
adds 400,000,000 to 400,000,000. And so likewise in eternity; he that
has an idea of but four years, has as much a positive complete idea of
eternity, as he that has one of 400,000,000 of years: for what remains
of eternity beyond either of these two numbers of years, is as clear to
the one as the other; i.e. neither of them has any clear positive idea
of it at all. For he that adds only 4 years to 4, and so on, shall as
soon reach eternity as he that adds 400,000,000 of years, and so on;
or, if he please, doubles the increase as often as he will: the
remaining abyss being still as far beyond the end of all these
progressions as it is from the length of a day or an hour. For nothing
finite bears any proportion to infinite; and therefore our ideas, which
are all finite, cannot bear any. Thus it is also in our idea of
extension, when we increase it by addition, as well as when we diminish
it by division, and would enlarge our thoughts to infinite space. After
a few doublings of those ideas of extension, which are the largest we
are accustomed to have, we lose the clear distinct idea of that space:
it becomes a confusedly great one, with a surplus of still greater;
about which, when we would argue or reason, we shall always find
ourselves at a loss; confused ideas, in our arguings and deductions
from that part of them which is confused, always leading us into
confusion.




CHAPTER XXX.
OF REAL AND FANTASTICAL IDEAS.


1. Ideas considered in reference to their Archetypes.

Besides what we have already mentioned concerning ideas, other
considerations belong to them, in reference to THINGS FROM WHENCE THEY
ARE TAKEN, or WHICH THEY MAY BE SUPPOSED TO REPRESENT; and thus, I
think, they may come under a threefold distinction, and are:—First,
either real or fantastical; Secondly, adequate or inadequate; Thirdly,
true or false.

First, by REAL IDEAS, I mean such as have a foundation in nature; such
as have a conformity with the real being and existence of things, or
with their archetypes. FANTASTICAL or CHIMERICAL, I call such as have
no foundation in nature, nor have any conformity with that reality of
being to which they are tacitly referred, as to their archetypes. If we
examine the several sorts of ideas before mentioned, we shall find
that,

2. Simple Ideas are all real appearances of things.

First, Our SIMPLE IDEAS are all real, all agree to the reality of
things: not that they are all of them the images or representations of
what does exist; the contrary whereof, in all but the primary qualities
of bodies, hath been already shown. But, though whiteness and coldness
are no more in snow than pain is; yet those ideas of whiteness and
coldness, pain, &c., being in us the effects of powers in things
without us, ordained by our Maker to produce in us such sensations;
they are real ideas in us, whereby we distinguish the qualities that
are really in things themselves. For, these several appearances being
designed to be the mark whereby we are to know and distinguish things
which we have to do with, our ideas do as well serve us to that
purpose, and are as real distinguishing characters, whether they be
only CONSTANT EFFECTS, or else EXACT RESEMBLANCES of something in the
things themselves: the reality lying in that steady correspondence they
have with the distinct constitutions of real beings. But whether they
answer to those constitutions, as to causes or patterns, it matters
not; it suffices that they are constantly produced by them. And thus
our simple ideas are all real and true, because they answer and agree
to those powers of things which produce them on our minds; that being
all that is requisite to make them real, and not fictions at pleasure.
For in simple ideas (as has been shown) the mind is wholly confined to
the operation of things upon it, and can make to itself no simple idea,
more than what it was received.

3. Complex Ideas are voluntary Combinations.

Though the mind be wholly passive in respect of its simple ideas; yet,
I think, we may say it is not so in respect of its complex ideas. For
those being combinations of simple ideas put together, and united under
one general name, it is plain that the mind of man uses some kind of
liberty in forming those complex ideas: how else comes it to pass that
one man’s idea of gold, or justice, is different from another’s, but
because he has put in, or left out of his, some simple idea which the
other has not? The question then is, Which of these are real, and which
barely imaginary combinations? What collections agree to the reality of
things, and what not? And to this I say that,

4. Mixed Modes and Relations, made of consistent Ideas, are real.

Secondly, MIXED MODES and RELATIONS, having no other reality but what
they have in the minds of men, there is nothing more required to this
kind of ideas to make them real, but that they be so framed, that there
be a possibility of existing conformable to them. These ideas
themselves, being archetypes, cannot differ from their archetypes, and
so cannot be chimerical, unless any one will jumble together in them
inconsistent ideas. Indeed, as any of them have the names of a known
language assigned to them, by which he that has them in his mind would
signify them to others, so bare possibility of existing is not enough;
they must have a conformity to the ordinary signification of the name
that is given them, that they may not be thought fantastical: as if a
man would give the name of justice to that idea which common use calls
liberality. But this fantasticalness relates more to propriety of
speech, than reality of ideas. For a man to be undisturbed in danger,
sedately to consider what is fittest to be done, and to execute it
steadily, is a mixed mode, or a complex idea of an action which may
exist. But to be undisturbed in danger, without using one’s reason or
industry, is what is also possible to be; and so is as real an idea as
the other. Though the first of these, having the name COURAGE given to
it, may, in respect of that name, be a right or wrong idea; but the
other, whilst it has not a common received name of any known language
assigned to it, is not capable of any deformity, being made with no
reference to anything but itself.

5. Complex Ideas of Substances are real, when they agree with the
existence of Things.

Thirdly, Our complex ideas of SUBSTANCES, being made all of them in
reference to things existing without us, and intended to be
representations of substances as they really are, are no further real
than as they are such combinations of simple ideas as are really
united, and co-exist in things without us. On the contrary, those are
fantastical which are made up of such collections of simple ideas as
were really never united, never were found together in any substance:
v. g. a rational creature, consisting of a horse’s head, joined to a
body of human shape, or such as the CENTAURS are described: or, a body
yellow, very malleable, fusible, and fixed, but lighter than common
water: or an uniform, unorganized body, consisting, as to sense, all of
similar parts, with perception and voluntary motion joined to it.
Whether such substances as these can possibly exist or no, it is
probable we do not know: but be that as it will, these ideas of
substances, being made conformable to no pattern existing that we know;
and consisting of such collections of ideas as no substance ever showed
us united together, they ought to pass with us for barely imaginary:
but much more are those complex ideas so, which contain in them any
inconsistency or contradiction of their parts.




CHAPTER XXXI.
OF ADEQUATE AND INADEQUATE IDEAS.


1. Adequate Ideas are such as perfectly represent their Archetypes.

Of our real ideas, some are adequate, and some are inadequate. Those I
call ADEQUATE, which perfectly represent those archetypes which the
mind supposes them taken from: which it intends them to stand for, and
to which it refers them. INADEQUATE IDEAS are such, which are but a
partial or incomplete representation of those archetypes to which they
are referred. Upon which account it is plain,

2. Adequate Ideas are such as perfectly represent their Archetypes.
Simple Ideas all adequate.

First, that ALL OUR SIMPLE IDEAS ARE ADEQUATE. Because, being nothing
but the effects of certain powers in things, fitted and ordained by God
to produce such sensations in us, they cannot but be correspondent and
adequate to those powers: and we are sure they agree to the reality of
things. For, if sugar produce in us the ideas which we call whiteness
and sweetness, we are sure there is a power in sugar to produce those
ideas in our minds, or else they could not have been produced by it.
And so each sensation answering the power that operates on any of our
senses, the idea so produced is a real idea, (and not a fiction of the
mind, which has no power to produce any simple idea); and cannot but be
adequate, since it ought only to answer that power: and so all simple
ideas are adequate. It is true, the things producing in us these simple
ideas are but few of them denominated by us, as if they were only the
CAUSES of them; but as if those ideas were real beings IN them. For,
though fire be called painful to the touch, whereby is signified the
power of producing in us the idea of pain, yet it is denominated also
light and hot; as if light and heat were really something in the fire,
more than a power to excite these ideas in us; and therefore are called
qualities in or of the fire. But these being nothing, in truth, but
powers to excite such ideas in us, I must in that sense be understood,
when I speak of secondary qualities as being in things; or of their
ideas as being the objects that excite them in us. Such ways of
speaking, though accommodated to the vulgar notions, without which one
cannot be well understood, yet truly signify nothing but those powers
which are in things to excite certain sensations or ideas in us. Since
were there no fit organs to receive the impressions fire makes on the
sight and touch, nor a mind joined to those organs to receive the ideas
of light and heat by those impressions from the fire or sun, there
would yet be no more light or heat in the world than there would be
pain if there were no sensible creature to feel it, though the sun
should continue just as it is now, and Mount AEtna flame higher than
ever it did. Solidity and extension, and the termination of it, figure,
with motion and rest, whereof we have the ideas, would be really in the
world as they are, whether there were any sensible being to perceive
them or no: and therefore we have reason to look on those as the real
modifications of matter, and such as are the exciting causes of all our
various sensations from bodies. But this being an inquiry not belonging
to this place, I shall enter no further into it, but proceed to show
what complex ideas are adequate, and what not.

3. Modes are all adequate.

Secondly, OUR COMPLEX IDEAS OF MODES, being voluntary collections of
simple ideas, which the mind puts together, without reference to any
real archetypes, or standing patterns, existing anywhere, are and
cannot but be ADEQUATE IDEAS. Because they, not being intended for
copies of things really existing, but for archetypes made by the mind,
to rank and denominate things by, cannot want anything; they having
each of them that combination of ideas, and thereby that perfection,
which the mind intended they should: so that the mind acquiesces in
them, and can find nothing wanting. Thus, by having the idea of a
figure with three sides meeting at three angles, I have a complete
idea, wherein I require nothing else to make it perfect. That the mind
is satisfied with the perfection of this its idea is plain, in that it
does not conceive that any understanding hath, or can have, a more
complete or perfect idea of that thing it signifies by the word
triangle, supposing it to exist, than itself has, in that complex idea
of three sides and three angles, in which is contained all that is or
can be essential to it, or necessary to complete it, wherever or
however it exists. But in our IDEAS OF SUBSTANCES it is otherwise. For
there, desiring to copy things as they really do exist, and to
represent to ourselves that constitution on which all their properties
depend, we perceive our ideas attain not that perfection we intend: we
find they still want something we should be glad were in them; and so
are all inadequate. But MIXED MODES and RELATIONS, being archetypes
without patterns, and so having nothing to represent but themselves,
cannot but be adequate, everything being so to itself. He that at first
put together the idea of danger perceived, absence of disorder from
fear, sedate consideration of what was justly to be done, and executing
that without disturbance, or being deterred by the danger of it, had
certainly in his mind that complex idea made up of that combination:
and intending it to be nothing else but what is, nor to have in it any
other simple ideas but what it hath, it could not also but be an
adequate idea: and laying this up in his memory, with the name COURAGE
annexed to it, to signify to others, and denominate from thence any
action he should observe to agree with it, had thereby a standard to
measure and denominate actions by, as they agreed to it. This idea,
thus made and laid up for a pattern, must necessarily be adequate,
being referred to nothing else but itself, nor made by any other
original but the good liking and will of him that first made this
combination.

4. Modes, in reference to settled Names, may be inadequate.

Indeed another coming after, and in conversation learning from him the
word COURAGE, may make an idea, to which he gives the name courage,
different from what the first author applied it to, and has in his mind
when he uses it. And in this case, if he designs that his idea in
thinking should be conformable to the other’s idea, as the name he uses
in speaking is conformable in sound to his from whom he learned it, his
idea may be very wrong and inadequate: because in this case, making the
other man’s idea the pattern of his idea in thinking, as the other
man’s word or sound is the pattern of his in speaking, his idea is so
far defective and inadequate, as it is distant from the archetype and
pattern he refers it to, and intends to express and signify by the name
he uses for it; which name he would have to be a sign of the other
man’s idea, (to which, in its proper use, it is primarily annexed,) and
of his own, as agreeing to it: to which if his own does not exactly
correspond, it is faulty and inadequate.

5. Because then means, in propriety of speech, to correspond to the
ideas in some other mind.

Therefore these complex ideas of MODES, which they are referred by the
mind, and intended to correspond to the ideas in the mind of some other
intelligent being, expressed by the names we apply to them, they may be
very deficient, wrong, and inadequate; because they agree not to that
which the mind designs to be their archetype and pattern: in which
respect only any idea of modes can be wrong, imperfect, or inadequate.
And on this account our ideas of mixed modes are the most liable to be
faulty of any other; but this refers more to proper speaking than
knowing right.

6. Ideas of Substances, as referred to real Essences, not adequate.

Thirdly, what IDEAS WE HAVE OF SUBSTANCES, I have above shown. Now,
those ideas have in the mind a double reference: 1. Sometimes they are
referred to a supposed real essence of each species of things. 2.
Sometimes they are only designed to be pictures and representations in
the mind of things that do exist, by ideas of those qualities that are
discoverable in them. In both which ways these copies of those
originals and archetypes are imperfect and inadequate.

First, it is usual for men to make the names of substances stand for
things as supposed to have certain real essences, whereby they are of
this or that species: and names standing for nothing but the ideas that
are in men’s minds, they must constantly refer their ideas to such real
essences, as to their archetypes. That men (especially such as have
been bred up in the learning taught in this part of the world) do
suppose certain specific essences of substances, which each individual
in its several kinds is made conformable to and partakes of, is so far
from needing proof that it will be thought strange if any one should do
otherwise. And thus they ordinarily apply the specific names they rank
particular substances under, to things as distinguished by such
specific real essences. Who is there almost, who would not take it
amiss if it should be doubted whether he called himself a man, with any
other meaning than as having the real essence of a man? And yet if you
demand what those real essences are, it is plain men are ignorant, and
know them not. From whence it follows, that the ideas they have in
their minds, being referred to real essences, as to archetypes which
are unknown, must be so far from being adequate that they cannot be
supposed to be any representation of them at all. The complex ideas we
have of substances are, as it has been shown, certain collections of
simple ideas that have been observed or supposed constantly to exist
together. But such a complex idea cannot be the real essence of any
substance; for then the properties we discover in that body would
depend on that complex idea, and be deducible from it, and their
necessary connexion with it be known; as all properties of a triangle
depend on, and, as far as they are discoverable, are deducible from the
complex idea of three lines including a space. But it is plain that in
our complex ideas of substances are not contained such ideas, on which
all the other qualities that are to be found in them do depend. The
common idea men have of iron is, a body of a certain colour, weight,
and hardness; and a property that they look on as belonging to it, is
malleableness. But yet this property has no necessary connexion with
that complex idea, or any part of it: and there is no more reason to
think that malleableness depends on that colour, weight, and hardness,
than that colour or that weight depends on its malleableness. And yet,
though we know nothing of these real essences, there is nothing more
ordinary than that men should attribute the sorts of things to such
essences. The particular parcel of matter which makes the ring I have
on my finger is forwardly by most men supposed to have a real essence,
whereby it is gold; and from whence those qualities flow which I find
in it, viz. its peculiar colour, weight, hardness, fusibility,
fixedness, and change of colour upon a slight touch of mercury, &c.
This essence, from which all these properties flow, when I inquire into
it and search after it, I plainly perceive I cannot discover: the
furthest I can go is, only to presume that, it being nothing but body,
its real essence or internal constitution, on which these qualities
depend, can be nothing but the figure, size, and connexion of its solid
parts; of neither of which having any distinct perception at all can I
have any idea of its essence: which is the cause that it has that
particular shining yellowness; a greater weight than anything I know of
the same bulk; and a fitness to have its colour changed by the touch of
quicksilver. If any one will say, that the real essence and internal
constitution, on which these properties depend, is not the figure,
size, and arrangement or connexion of its solid parts, but something
else, called its particular FORM, I am further from having any idea of
its real essence than I was before. For I have an idea of figure, size,
and situation of solid parts in general, though I have none of the
particular figure, size, or putting together of parts, whereby the
qualities above mentioned are produced; which qualities I find in that
particular parcel of matter that is on my finger, and not in another
parcel of matter, with which I cut the pen I write with. But, when I am
told that something besides the figure, size, and posture of the solid
parts of that body in its essence, something called SUBSTANTIAL FORM,
of that I confess I have no idea at all, but only of the sound form;
which is far enough from an idea of its real essence or constitution.
The like ignorance as I have of the real essence of this particular
substance, I have also of the real essence of all other natural ones:
of which essences I confess I have no distinct ideas at all; and, I am
apt to suppose, others, when they examine their own knowledge, will
find in themselves, in this one point, the same sort of ignorance.

7. Because men know not the real essence of substances.

Now, then, when men apply to this particular parcel of matter on my
finger a general name already in use, and denominate it GOLD, do they
not ordinarily, or are they not understood to give it that name, as
belonging to a particular species of bodies, having a real internal
essence; by having of which essence this particular substance comes to
be of that species, and to be called by that name? If it be so, as it
is plain it is, the name by which things are marked as having that
essence must be referred primarily to that essence; and consequently
the idea to which that name is given must be referred also to that
essence, and be intended to represent it. Which essence, since they who
so use the names know not, their ideas of substances must be all
inadequate in that respect, as not containing in them that real essence
which the mind intends they should.

8. Ideas of Substances, when regarded as Collections of their
Qualities, are all inadequate.

Secondly, those who, neglecting that useless supposition of unknown
real essences, whereby they are distinguished, endeavour to copy the
substances that exist in the world, by putting together the ideas of
those sensible qualities which are found co-existing in them, though
they come much nearer a likeness of them than those who imagine they
know not what real specific essences: yet they arrive not at perfectly
adequate ideas of those substances they would thus copy into their
minds: nor do those copies exactly and fully contain all that is to be
found in their archetypes. Because those qualities and powers of
substances, whereof we make their complex ideas, are so many and
various, that no man’s complex idea contains them all. That our complex
ideas of substances do not contain in them ALL the simple ideas that
are united in the things themselves is evident, in that men do rarely
put into their complex idea of any substance all the simple ideas they
do know to exist in it. Because, endeavouring to make the signification
of their names as clear and as little cumbersome as they can, they make
their specific ideas of the sorts of substance, for the most part, of a
few of those simple ideas which are to be found in them: but these
having no original precedency, or right to be put in, and make the
specific idea, more than others that are left out, it is plain that
both these ways our ideas of substances are deficient and inadequate.
The simple ideas whereof we make our complex ones of substances are all
of them (bating only the figure and bulk of some sorts) powers; which
being relations to other substances, we can never be sure that we know
ALL the powers that are in any one body, till we have tried what
changes it is fitted to give to or receive from other substances in
their several ways of application: which being impossible to be tried
upon any one body, much less upon all, it is impossible we should have
adequate ideas of any substance made up of a collection of all its
properties.

9. Their powers usually make up our complex ideas of substances.

Whosoever first lighted on a parcel of that sort of substance we denote
by the word GOLD, could not rationally take the bulk and figure he
observed in that lump to depend on its real essence, or internal
constitution. Therefore those never went into his idea of that species
of body; but its peculiar colour, perhaps, and weight, were the first
he abstracted from it, to make the complex idea of that species. Which
both are but powers; the one to affect our eyes after such a manner,
and to produce in us that idea we call yellow; and the other to force
upwards any other body of equal bulk, they being put into a pair of
equal scales, one against another. Another perhaps added to these the
ideas of fusibility and fixedness, two other passive powers, in
relation to the operation of fire upon it; another, its ductility and
solubility in aqua regia, two other powers, relating to the operation
of other bodies, in changing its outward figure, or separation of it
into insensible parts. These, or parts of these, put together, usually
make the complex idea in men’s minds of that sort of body we call GOLD.

10. Substances have innumerable powers not contained in our complex
ideas of them.

But no one who hath considered the properties of bodies in general, or
this sort in particular, can doubt that this, called GOLD, has infinite
other properties not contained in that complex idea. Some who have
examined this species more accurately could, I believe, enumerate ten
times as many properties in gold, all of them as inseparable from its
internal constitution, as its colour or weight: and it is probable, if
any one knew all the properties that are by divers men known of this
metal, there would be an hundred times as many ideas go to the complex
idea of gold as any one man yet has in his; and yet perhaps that not be
the thousandth part of what is to be discovered in it. The changes that
that one body is apt to receive, and make in other bodies, upon a due
application, exceeding far not only what we know, but what we are apt
to imagine. Which will not appear so much a paradox to any one who will
but consider how far men are yet from knowing all the properties of
that one, no very compound figure, a triangle; though it be no small
number that are already by mathematicians discovered of it.

11. Ideas of Substances, being got only by collecting their qualities,
are all inadequate.

So that all our complex ideas of substances are imperfect and
inadequate. Which would be so also in mathematical figures, if we were
to have our complex ideas of them, only by collecting their properties
in reference to other figures. How uncertain and imperfect would our
ideas be of an ellipsis, if we had no other idea of it, but some few of
its properties? Whereas, having in our plain idea the WHOLE essence of
that figure, we from thence discover those properties, and
demonstratively see how they flow, and are inseparable from it.

12. Simple Ideas, [word in Greek], and adequate.

Thus the mind has three sorts of abstract ideas or nominal essences:

First, SIMPLE ideas, which are [word in Greek] or copies; but yet
certainly adequate. Because, being intended to express nothing but the
power in things to produce in the mind such a sensation, that
sensation, when it is produced, cannot but be the effect of that power.
So the paper I write on, having the power in the light (I speak
according to the common notion of light) to produce in men the
sensation which I call white, it cannot but be the effect of such a
power in something without the mind; since the mind has not the power
to produce any such idea in itself: and being meant for nothing else
but the effect of such a power that simple idea is [* words missing]
the sensation of white, in my mind, being the effect of that power
which is in the paper to produce it, is perfectly adequate to that
power; or else that power would produce a different idea.

13. Ideas of Substances are Echthypa, and inadequate.

Secondly, the COMPLEX ideas of SUBSTANCES are ectypes, copies too; but
not perfect ones, not adequate: which is very evident to the mind, in
that it plainly perceives, that whatever collection of simple ideas it
makes of any substance that exists, it cannot be sure that it exactly
answers all that are in that substance. Since, not having tried all the
operations of all other substances upon it, and found all the
alterations it would receive from, or cause in, other substances, it
cannot have an exact adequate collection of all its active and passive
capacities; and so not have an adequate complex idea of the powers of
any substance existing, and its relations; which is that sort of
complex idea of substances we have. And, after all, if we would have,
and actually had, in our complex idea, an exact collection of all the
secondary qualities or powers of any substance, we should not yet
thereby have an idea of the ESSENCE of that thing. For, since the
powers or qualities that are observable by us are not the real essence
of that substance, but depend on it, and flow from it, any collection
whatsoever of these qualities cannot be the real essence of that thing.
Whereby it is plain, that our ideas of substances are not adequate; are
not what the mind intends them to be. Besides, a man has no idea of
substance in general, nor knows what substance is in itself.

14. Ideas of Modes and Relations are Archetypes, and cannot be
adequate.

Thirdly, COMPLEX ideas of MODES AND RELATIONS are originals, and
archetypes; are not copies, nor made after the pattern of any real
existence, to which the mind intends them to be conformable, and
exactly to answer. These being such collections of simple ideas that
the mind itself puts together, and such collections that each of them
contains in it precisely all that the mind intends that it should, they
are archetypes and essences of modes that may exist; and so are
designed only for, and belong only to such modes as, when they do
exist, have an exact conformity with those complex ideas The ideas,
therefore, of modes and relations cannot but be adequate.




CHAPTER XXXII.
OF TRUE AND FALSE IDEAS.


1. Truth and Falsehood properly belong to Propositions, not to Ideas.

Though truth and falsehood belong, in propriety of speech, only to
PROPOSITIONS: yet IDEAS are oftentimes termed true or false (as what
words are there that are not used with great latitude, and with some
deviation from their strict and proper significations?) Though I think
that when ideas themselves are termed true or false, there is still
some secret or tacit proposition, which is the foundation of that
denomination: as we shall see, if we examine the particular occasions
wherein they come to be called true or false. In all which we shall
find some kind of affirmation or negation, which is the reason of that
denomination. For our ideas, being nothing but bare APPEARANCES, or
perceptions in our minds, cannot properly and simply in themselves be
said to be true or false, no more than a single name of anything can be
said to be true or false.

2. Ideas and words may be said to be true, inasmuch as they really are
ideas and words.

Indeed both ideas and words may be said to be true, in a metaphysical
sense of the word truth; as all other things that any way exist are
said to be true, i.e. really to be such as they exist. Though in things
called true, even in that sense, there is perhaps a secret reference to
our ideas, looked upon as the standards of that truth; which amounts to
a mental proposition, though it be usually not taken notice of.

3. No Idea, as an Appearance in the Mind, either true or false.

But it is not in that metaphysical sense of truth which we inquire
here, when we examine, whether our ideas are capable of being true or
false, but in the more ordinary acceptation of those words: and so I
say that the ideas in our minds, being only so many perceptions or
appearances there, none of them are false; the idea of a centaur having
no more falsehood in it when it appears in our minds, than the name
centaur has falsehood in it, when it is pronounced by our mouths, or
written on paper. For truth or falsehood lying always in some
affirmation or negation, mental or verbal, our ideas are not capable,
any of them, of being false, till the mind passes some judgment on
them; that is, affirms or denies something of them.

4. Ideas referred to anything extraneous to them may be true or false.

Whenever the mind refers any of its ideas to anything extraneous to
them, they are then capable to be called true or false. Because the
mind, in such a reference, makes a tacit supposition of their
conformity to that thing; which supposition, as it happens to be true
or false, so the ideas themselves come to be denominated. The most
usual cases wherein this happens, are these following:

5. Other Men’s Ideas; real Existence; and supposed real Essences, are
what Men usually refer their Ideas to.

First, when the mind supposes any idea it has CONFORMABLE to that in
OTHER MEN’S MINDS, called by the same common name; v.g. when the mind
intends or judges its ideas of justice, temperance, religion, to be the
same with what other men give those names to.

Secondly, when the mind supposes any idea it has in itself to be
CONFORMABLE to some REAL EXISTENCE. Thus the two ideas of a man and a
centaur, supposed to be the ideas of real substances, are the one true
and the other false; the one having a conformity to what has really
existed, the other not. Thirdly, when the mind REFERS any of its ideas
to that REAL constitution and ESSENCE of anything, whereon all its
properties depend: and thus the greatest part, if not all our ideas of
substances, are false.

6. The cause of such Reference.

These suppositions the mind is very apt tacitly to make concerning its
own ideas. But yet, if we will examine it, we shall find it is chiefly,
if not only, concerning its ABSTRACT complex ideas. For the natural
tendency of the mind being towards knowledge; and finding that, if it
should proceed by and dwell upon only particular things, its progress
would be very slow, and its work endless; therefore, to shorten its way
to knowledge, and make each perception more comprehensive, the first
thing it does, as the foundation of the easier enlarging its knowledge,
either by contemplation of the things themselves that it would know, or
conference with others about them, is to bind them into bundles, and
rank them so into sorts, that what knowledge it gets of any of them it
may thereby with assurance extend to all of that sort; and so advance
by larger steps in that which is its great business, knowledge. This,
as I have elsewhere shown, is the reason why we collect things under
comprehensive ideas, with names annexed to them, into genera and
species; i.e. into kinds and sorts.

7. Names of things supposed to carry in them knowledge of their
essences.

If therefore we will warily attend to the motions of the mind, and
observe what course it usually takes in its way to knowledge, we shall
I think find, that the mind having got an idea which it thinks it may
have use of either in contemplation or discourse, the first thing it
does is to abstract it, and then get a name to it; and so lay it up in
its storehouse, the memory, as containing the essence of a sort of
things, of which that name is always to be the mark. Hence it is, that
we may often observe that, when any one sees a new thing of a kind that
he knows not, he presently asks, what it is; meaning by that inquiry
nothing but the name. As if the name carried with it the knowledge of
the species, or the essence of it; whereof it is indeed used as the
mark, and is generally supposed annexed to it.

8. How men suppose that their ideas must correspond to things, and to
the customary meanings of names.

But this ABSTRACT IDEA, being something in the mind, between the thing
that exists, and the name that is given to it; it is in our ideas that
both the rightness of our knowledge, and the propriety and
intelligibleness of our speaking, consists. And hence it is that men
are so forward to suppose, that the abstract ideas they have in their
minds are such as agree to the things existing without them, to which
they are referred; and are the same also to which the names they give
them do by the use and propriety of that language belong. For without
this double conformity of their ideas, they find they should both think
amiss of things in themselves, and talk of them unintelligibly to
others.

9. Simple Ideas may be false, in reference to others of the same Name,
but are least liable to be so.

First, then, I say, that when the truth of our ideas is judged of by
the conformity they have to the ideas which other men have, and
commonly signify by the same name, they may be any of them false. But
yet SIMPLE IDEAS are least of all liable to be so mistaken. Because a
man, by his senses and every day’s observation, may easily satisfy
himself what the simple ideas are which their several names that are in
common use stand for; they being but few in number, and such as, if he
doubts or mistakes in, he may easily rectify by the objects they are to
be found in. Therefore it is seldom that any one mistakes in his names
of simple ideas, or applies the name red to the idea green, or the name
sweet to the idea bitter: much less are men apt to confound the names
of ideas belonging to different senses, and call a colour by the name
of a taste, &c. Whereby it is evident that the simple ideas they call
by any name are commonly the same that others have and mean when they
use the same names.

10. Ideas of mixed Modes most liable to be false in this Sense.

Complex ideas are much more liable to be false in this respect; and the
complex ideas of MIXED MODES, much more than those of substances;
because in substances (especially those which the common and unborrowed
names of any language are applied to) some remarkable sensible
qualities, serving ordinarily to distinguish one sort from another,
easily preserve those who take any care in the use of their words, from
applying them to sorts of substances to which they do not at all
belong. But in mixed modes we are much more uncertain; it being not so
easy to determine of several actions, whether they are to be called
JUSTICE or CRUELTY, LIBERALITY or PRODIGALITY. And so in referring our
ideas to those of other men, called by the same names, ours may be
false; and the idea in our minds, which we express by the word JUSTICE,
may perhaps be that which ought to have another name.

11. Or at least to be thought false.

But whether or no our ideas of mixed modes are more liable than any
sort to be different from those of other men, which are marked by the
same names, this at least is certain. That this sort of falsehood is
much more familiarly attributed to our ideas of mixed modes than to any
other. When a man is thought to have a false idea of JUSTICE, or
GRATITUDE, or GLORY, it is for no other reason, but that his agrees not
with the ideas which each of those names are the signs of in other men.

12. And why.

The reason whereof seems to me to be this: That the abstract ideas of
mixed modes, being men’s voluntary combinations of such a precise
collection of simple ideas, and so the essence of each species being
made by men alone, whereof we have no other sensible standard existing
anywhere but the name itself, or the definition of that name; we having
nothing else to refer these our ideas of mixed modes to, as a standard
to which we would conform them, but the ideas of those who are thought
to use those names in their most proper significations; and, so as our
ideas conform or differ from THEM, they pass for true or false. And
thus much concerning the truth and falsehood of our ideas, in reference
to their names.

13. As referred to Real Existence, none of our Ideas can be false but
those of Substances.

Secondly, as to the truth and falsehood of our ideas, in reference to
the real existence of things. When that is made the standard of their
truth, none of them can be termed false but only our complex ideas of
substances.

14. First, Simple Ideas in this Sense not false and why.

First, our simple ideas, being barely such perceptions as God has
fitted us to receive, and given power to external objects to produce in
us by established laws and ways, suitable to his wisdom and goodness,
though incomprehensible to us, their truth consists in nothing else but
in such appearances as are produced in us, and must be suitable to
those powers he has placed in external objects or else they could not
be produced in us: and thus answering those powers, they are what they
should be, true ideas. Nor do they become liable to any imputation of
falsehood, if the mind (as in most men I believe it does) judges these
ideas to be in the things themselves. For God in his wisdom having set
them as marks of distinction in things, whereby we may be able to
discern one thing from another, and so choose any of them for our uses
as we have occasion; it alters not the nature of our simple idea,
whether we think that the idea of blue be in the violet itself, or in
our mind only; and only the power of producing it by the texture of its
parts, reflecting the particles of light after a certain manner, to be
in the violet itself. For that texture in the object, by a regular and
constant operation producing the same idea of blue in us, it serves us
to distinguish, by our eyes, that from any other thing; whether that
distinguishing mark, as it is really in the violet, be only a peculiar
texture of parts, or else that very colour, the idea whereof (which is
in us) is the exact resemblance. And it is equally from that appearance
to be denominated blue, whether it be that real colour, or only a
peculiar texture in it, that causes in us that idea: since the name,
BLUE, notes properly nothing but that mark of distinction that is in a
violet, discernible only by our eyes, whatever it consists in; that
being beyond our capacities distinctly to know, and perhaps would be of
less use to us, if we had faculties to discern.

15. Though one Man’s Idea of Blue should be different from another’s.

Neither would it carry any imputation of falsehood to our simple ideas,
if by the different structure of our organs it were so ordered, that
THE SAME OBJECT SHOULD PRODUCE IN SEVERAL MEN’S MINDS DIFFERENT IDEAS
at the same time; v.g. if the idea that a violet produced in one man’s
mind by his eyes were the same that a marigold produced in another
man’s, and vice versa. For, since this could never be known, because
one man’s mind could not pass into another man’s body, to perceive what
appearances were produced by those organs; neither the ideas hereby,
nor the names, would be at all confounded, or any falsehood be in
either. For all things that had the texture of a violet, producing
constantly the idea that he called blue, and those which had the
texture of a marigold, producing constantly the idea which he as
constantly called yellow, whatever those appearances were in his mind;
he would be able as regularly to distinguish things for his use by
those appearances, and understand and signify those distinctions marked
by the name blue and yellow, as if the appearances or ideas in his mind
received from those two flowers were exactly the same with the ideas in
other men’s minds. I am nevertheless very apt to think that the
sensible ideas produced by any object in different men’s minds, are
most commonly very near and undiscernibly alike. For which opinion, I
think, there might be many reasons offered: but that being besides my
present business, I shall not trouble my reader with them; but only
mind him, that the contrary supposition, if it could be proved, is of
little use, either for the improvement of our knowledge, or conveniency
of life, and so we need not trouble ourselves to examine it.

16. Simple Ideas can none of them be false in respect of real
existence.

From what has been said concerning our simple ideas, I think it evident
that our simple ideas can none of them be false in respect of things
existing without us. For the truth of these appearances or perceptions
in our minds consisting, as has been said, only in their being
answerable to the powers in external objects to produce by our senses
such appearances in us, and each of them being in the mind such as it
is, suitable to the power that produced it, and which alone it
represents, it cannot upon that account, or as referred to such a
pattern, be false. Blue and yellow, bitter or sweet, can never be false
ideas: these perceptions in the mind are just such as they are there,
answering the powers appointed by God to produce them; and so are truly
what they are, and are intended to be. Indeed the names may be
misapplied, but that in this respect makes no falsehood in the ideas;
as if a man ignorant in the English tongue should call purple scarlet.

17. Secondly, Modes not false cannot be false in reference to essences
of things.

Secondly, neither can our complex ideas of modes, in reference to the
essence of anything really existing, be false; because whatever complex
ideas I have of any mode, it hath no reference to any pattern existing,
and made by nature; it is not supposed to contain in it any other ideas
than what it hath; nor to represent anything but such a complication of
ideas as it does. Thus, when I have the idea of such an action of a man
who forbears to afford himself such meat, drink, and clothing, and
other conveniences of life, as his riches and estate will be sufficient
to supply and his station requires, I have no false idea; but such an
one as represents an action, either as I find or imagine it, and so is
capable of neither truth nor falsehood. But when I give the name
FRUGALITY or VIRTUE to this action, then it may be called a false idea,
if thereby it be supposed to agree with that idea to which, in
propriety of speech, the name of frugality doth belong, or to be
conformable to that law which is the standard of virtue and vice.

18. Thirdly, Ideas of Substances may be false in reference to existing
things.

Thirdly, our complex ideas of substances, being all referred to
patterns in things themselves, may be false. That they are all false,
when looked upon as the representations of the unknown essences of
things, is so evident that there needs nothing to be said of it. I
shall therefore pass over that chimerical supposition, and consider
them as collections of simple ideas in the mind, taken from
combinations of simple ideas existing together constantly in things, of
which patterns they are the supposed copies; and in this reference of
them to the existence of things, they are false ideas:—(1) When they
put together simple ideas, which in the real existence of things have
no union; as when to the shape and size that exist together in a horse,
is joined in the same complex idea the power of barking like a dog:
which three ideas, however put together into one in the mind, were
never united in nature; and this, therefore, may be called a false idea
of a horse. (2) Ideas of substances are, in this respect, also false,
when, from any collection of simple ideas that do always exist
together, there is separated, by a direct negation, any other simple
idea which is constantly joined with them. Thus, if to extension,
solidity, fusibility, the peculiar weightiness, and yellow colour of
gold, any one join in his thoughts the negation of a greater degree of
fixedness than is in lead or copper, he may be said to have a false
complex idea, as well as when he joins to those other simple ones the
idea of perfect absolute fixedness. For either way, the complex idea of
gold being made up of such simple ones as have no union in nature, may
be termed false. But, if he leaves out of this his complex idea that of
fixedness quite, without either actually joining to or separating it
from the rest in his mind, it is, I think, to be looked on as an
inadequate and imperfect idea, rather than a false one; since, though
it contains not all the simple ideas that are united in nature, yet it
puts none together but what do really exist together.

19. Truth or Falsehood always supposes Affirmation or Negation.

Though, in compliance with the ordinary way of speaking, I have shown
in what sense and upon what ground our ideas may be sometimes called
true or false; yet if we will look a little nearer into the matter, in
all cases where any idea is called true or false, it is from some
JUDGMENT that the mind makes, or is supposed to make, that is true or
false. For truth or falsehood, being never without some affirmation or
negation, express or tacit, it is not to be found but where signs are
joined or separated, according to the agreement or disagreement of the
things they stand for. The signs we chiefly use are either ideas or
words; wherewith we make either mental or verbal propositions. Truth
lies in so joining or separating these representatives, as the things
they stand for do in themselves agree or disagree; and falsehood in the
contrary, as shall be more fully shown hereafter.

20. Ideas in themselves neither true nor false.

Any idea, then, which we have in our minds, whether conformable or not
to the existence of things, or to any idea in the minds of other men,
cannot properly for this alone be called false. For these
representations, if they have nothing in them but what is really
existing in things without, cannot be thought false, being exact
representations of something: nor yet if they have anything in them
differing from the reality of things, can they properly be said to be
false representations, or ideas of things they do not represent. But
the mistake and falsehood is:

21. But are false—1. When judged agreeable to another Man’s Idea,
without being so.

First, when the mind having any idea, it JUDGES and concludes it the
same that is in other men’s minds, signified by the same name; or that
it is conformable to the ordinary received signification or definition
of that word, when indeed it is not: which is the most usual mistake in
mixed modes, though other ideas also are liable to it.

22. Secondly, When judged to agree to real Existence, when they do not.

(2) When it having a complex idea made up of such a collection of
simple ones as nature never puts together, it JUDGES it to agree to a
species of creatures really existing; as when it joins the weight of
tin to the colour, fusibility, and fixedness of gold.

23. Thirdly, When judged adequate, without being so.

(3) When in its complex idea it has united a certain number of simple
ideas that do really exist together in some sort of creatures, but has
also left out others as much inseparable, it JUDGES this to be a
perfect complete idea of a sort of things which really it is not; v.g.
having joined the ideas of substance, yellow, malleable, most heavy,
and fusible, it takes that complex idea to be the complete idea of
gold, when yet its peculiar fixedness, and solubility in AQUA REGIA,
are as inseparable from those other ideas, or qualities, of that body
as they are one from another.

24. Fourthly, When judged to represent the real Essence.

(4) The mistake is yet greater, when I JUDGE that this complex idea
contains in it the real essence of any body existing; when at least it
contains but some few of those properties which flow from its real
essence and constitution. I say only some few of those properties; for
those properties consisting mostly in the active and passive powers it
has in reference to other things, all that are vulgarly known of any
one body, of which the complex idea of that kind of things is usually
made, are but a very few, in comparison of what a man that has several
ways tried and examined it knows of that one sort of things; and all
that the most expert man knows are but a few, in comparison of what are
really in that body, and depend on its internal or essential
constitution. The essence of a triangle lies in a very little compass,
consists in a very few ideas: three lines including a space make up
that essence: but the properties that flow from this essence are more
than can be easily known or enumerated. So I imagine it is in
substances; their real essences lie in a little compass, though the
properties flowing from that internal constitution are endless.

25. Ideas, when called false.

To conclude, a man having no notion of anything without him, but by the
idea he has of it in his mind, (which idea he has a power to call by
what name he pleases,) he may indeed make an idea neither answering the
reason of things, nor agreeing to the idea commonly signified by other
people’s words; but cannot make a wrong or false idea of a thing which
is no otherwise known to him but by the idea he has of it: v.g. when I
frame an idea of the legs, arms, and body of a man, and join to this a
horse’s head and neck, I do not make a false idea of anything; because
it represents nothing without me. But when I call it a MAN or TARTAR,
and imagine it to represent some real being without me, or to be the
same idea that others call by the same name; in either of these cases I
may err. And upon this account it is that it comes to be termed a false
idea; though indeed the falsehood lies not in the idea, but in that
tacit mental proposition, wherein a conformity and resemblance is
attributed to it which it has not. But yet, if, having framed such an
idea in my mind, without thinking either that existence, or the name
MAN or TARTAR, belongs to it, I will call it MAN or TARTAR, I may be
justly thought fantastical in the naming; but not erroneous in my
judgment; nor the idea any way false.

26. More properly to be called right or wrong.

Upon the whole matter, I think that our ideas, as they are considered
by the mind,—either in reference to the proper signification of their
names; or in reference to the reality of things,—may very fitly be
called RIGHT or WRONG ideas, according as they agree or disagree to
those patterns to which they are referred. But if any one had rather
call them true or false, it is fit he use a liberty, which every one
has, to call things by those names he thinks best; though, in propriety
of speech, TRUTH or FALSEHOOD will, I think, scarce agree to them, but
as they, some way or other, virtually contain in them some mental
proposition. The ideas that are in a man’s mind, simply considered,
cannot be wrong; unless complex ones, wherein inconsistent parts are
jumbled together. All other ideas are in themselves right, and the
knowledge about them right and true knowledge; but when we come to
refer them to anything, as to their patterns and archetypes then they
are capable of being wrong, as far as they disagree with such
archetypes.




CHAPTER XXXIII.
OF THE ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS.


1. Something unreasonable in most Men.

There is scarce any one that does not observe something that seems odd
to him, and is in itself really extravagant, in the opinions,
reasonings, and actions of other men. The least flaw of this kind, if
at all different from his own, every one is quick-sighted enough to
espy in another, and will by the authority of reason forwardly condemn;
though he be guilty of much greater unreasonableness in his own tenets
and conduct, which he never perceives, and will very hardly, if at all,
be convinced of.

2. Not wholly from Self-love.

This proceeds not wholly from self-love, though that has often a great
hand in it. Men of fair minds, and not given up to the overweening of
self-flattery, are frequently guilty of it; and in many cases one with
amazement hears the arguings, and is astonished at the obstinacy of a
worthy man, who yields not to the evidence of reason, though laid
before him as clear as daylight.

3. Not from Education.

This sort of unreasonableness is usually imputed to education and
prejudice, and for the most part truly enough, though that reaches not
the bottom of the disease, nor shows distinctly enough whence it rises,
or wherein it lies. Education is often rightly assigned for the cause,
and prejudice is a good general name for the thing itself: but yet, I
think, he ought to look a little further, who would trace this sort of
madness to the root it springs from, and so explain it, as to show
whence this flaw has its original in very sober and rational minds, and
wherein it consists.

4. A Degree of Madness found in most Men.

I shall be pardoned for calling it by so harsh a name as madness, when
it is considered that opposition to reason deserves that name, and is
really madness; and there is scarce a man so free from it, but that if
he should always, on all occasions, argue or do as in some cases he
constantly does, would not be thought fitter for Bedlam than civil
conversation. I do not here mean when he is under the power of an
unruly passion, but in the steady calm course of his life. That which
will yet more apologize for this harsh name, and ungrateful imputation
on the greatest part of mankind, is, that, inquiring a little by the
bye into the nature of madness, (b. ii. ch. xi., Section 13,) I found
it to spring from the very same root, and to depend on the very same
cause we are here speaking of. This consideration of the thing itself,
at a time when I thought not the least on the subject which I am now
treating of, suggested it to me. And if this be a weakness to which all
men are so liable, if this be a taint which so universally infects
mankind, the greater care should be taken to lay it open under its due
name, thereby to excite the greater care in its prevention and cure.

5. From a wrong Connexion of Ideas.

Some of our ideas have a NATURAL correspondence and connexion one with
another: it is the office and excellency of our reason to trace these,
and hold them together in that union and correspondence which is
founded in their peculiar beings. Besides this, there is another
connexion of ideas wholly owing to CHANCE or CUSTOM. Ideas that in
themselves are not all of kin, come to be so united in some men’s
minds, that it is very hard to separate them; they always keep in
company, and the one no sooner at any time comes into the
understanding, but its associate appears with it; and if they are more
than two which are thus united, the whole gang, always inseparable,
show themselves together.

6. This Connexion made by custom.

This strong combination of ideas, not allied by nature, the mind makes
in itself either voluntarily or by chance; and hence it comes in
different men to be very different, according to their different
inclinations, education, interests, &c. CUSTOM settles habits of
thinking in the understanding, as well as of determining in the will,
and of motions in the body: all which seems to be but trains of motions
in the animal spirits, which, once set a going, continue in the same
steps they have been used to; which, by often treading, are worn into a
smooth path, and the motion in it becomes easy, and as it were natural.
As far as we can comprehend thinking, thus ideas seem to be produced in
our minds; or, if they are not, this may serve to explain their
following one another in an habitual train, when once they are put into
their track, as well as it does to explain such motions of the body. A
musician used to any tune will find that, let it but once begin in his
head, the ideas of the several notes of it will follow one another
orderly in his understanding, without any care or attention, as
regularly as his fingers move orderly over the keys of the organ to
play out the tune he has begun, though his unattentive thoughts be
elsewhere a wandering. Whether the natural cause of these ideas, as
well as of that regular dancing of his fingers be the motion of his
animal spirits, I will not determine, how probable soever, by this
instance, it appears to be so: but this may help us a little to
conceive of intellectual habits, and of the tying together of ideas.

7. Some Antipathies an Effect of it.

That there are such associations of them made by custom, in the minds
of most men, I think nobody will question, who has well considered
himself or others; and to this, perhaps, might be justly attributed
most of the sympathies and antipathies observable in men, which work as
strongly, and produce as regular effects as if they were natural; and
are therefore called so, though they at first had no other original but
the accidental connexion of two ideas, which either the strength of the
first impression, or future indulgence so united, that they always
afterwards kept company together in that man’s mind, as if they were
but one idea. I say most of the antipathies, I do not say all; for some
of them are truly natural, depend upon our original constitution, and
are born with us; but a great part of those which are counted natural,
would have been known to be from unheeded, though perhaps early,
impressions, or wanton fancies at first, which would have been
acknowledged the original of them, if they had been warily observed. A
grown person surfeiting with honey no sooner hears the name of it, but
his fancy immediately carries sickness and qualms to his stomach, and
he cannot bear the very idea of it; other ideas of dislike, and
sickness, and vomiting, presently accompany it, and he is disturbed;
but he knows from whence to date this weakness, and can tell how he got
this indisposition. Had this happened to him by an over-dose of honey
when a child, all the same effects would have followed; but the cause
would have been mistaken, and the antipathy counted natural.

8. Influence of association to be watched educating young children.

I mention this, not out of any great necessity there is in this present
argument to distinguish nicely between natural and acquired
antipathies; but I take notice of it for another purpose, viz. that
those who have children, or the charge of their education, would think
it worth their while diligently to watch, and carefully to prevent the
undue connexion of ideas in the minds of young people. This is the time
most susceptible of lasting impressions; and though those relating to
the health of the body are by discreet people minded and fenced
against, yet I am apt to doubt, that those which relate more peculiarly
to the mind, and terminate in the understanding or passions, have been
much less heeded than the thing deserves: nay, those relating purely to
the understanding, have, as I suspect, been by most men wholly
overlooked.

9. Wrong connexion of ideas a great Cause of Errors.

This wrong connexion in our minds of ideas in themselves loose and
independent of one another, has such an influence, and is of so great
force to set us awry in our actions, as well moral as natural,
passions, reasonings, and notions themselves, that perhaps there is not
any one thing that deserves more to be looked after.

10. As instance.

The ideas of goblins and sprites have really no more to do with
darkness than light: yet let but a foolish maid inculcate these often
on the mind of a child, and raise them there together, possibly he
shall never be able to separate them again so long as he lives, but
darkness shall ever afterwards bring with it those frightful ideas, and
they shall be so joined, that he can no more bear the one than the
other.

11. Another instance.

A man receives a sensible injury from another, thinks on the man and
that action over and over, and by ruminating on them strongly, or much,
in his mind, so cements those two ideas together, that he makes them
almost one; never thinks on the man, but the pain and displeasure he
suffered comes into his mind with it, so that he scarce distinguishes
them, but has as much an aversion for the one as the other. Thus
hatreds are often begotten from slight and innocent occasions, and
quarrels propagated and continued in the world.

12. A third instance.

A man has suffered pain or sickness in any place; he saw his friend die
in such a room: though these have in nature nothing to do one with
another, yet when the idea of the place occurs to his mind, it brings
(the impression being once made) that of the pain and displeasure with
it: he confounds them in his mind, and can as little bear the one as
the other.

13. Why Time cures some Disorders in the Mind, which Reason cannot
cure.

When this combination is settled, and while it lasts, it is not in the
power of reason to help us, and relieve us from the effects of it.
Ideas in our minds, when they are there, will operate according to
their natures and circumstances. And here we see the cause why time
cures certain affections, which reason, though in the right, and
allowed to be so, has not power over, nor is able against them to
prevail with those who are apt to hearken to it in other cases. The
death of a child that was the daily delight of its mother’s eyes, and
joy of her soul, rends from her heart the whole comfort of her life,
and gives her all the torment imaginable: use the consolations of
reason in this case, and you were as good preach ease to one on the
rack, and hope to allay, by rational discourses, the pain of his joints
tearing asunder. Till time has by disuse separated the sense of that
enjoyment and its loss, from the idea of the child returning to her
memory, all representations, though ever so reasonable, are in vain;
and therefore some in whom the union between these ideas is never
dissolved, spend their lives in mourning, and carry an incurable sorrow
to their graves.

14. Another instance of the Effect of the Association of Ideas.

A friend of mine knew one perfectly cured of madness by a very harsh
and offensive operation. The gentleman who was thus recovered, with
great sense of gratitude and acknowledgment owned the cure all his life
after, as the greatest obligation he could have received; but, whatever
gratitude and reason suggested to him, he could never bear the sight of
the operator: that image brought back with it the idea of that agony
which he suffered from his hands, which was too mighty and intolerable
for him to endure.

15. More instances.

Many children, imputing the pain they endured at school to their books
they were corrected for, so join those ideas together, that a book
becomes their aversion, and they are never reconciled to the study and
use of them all their lives after; and thus reading becomes a torment
to them, which otherwise possibly they might have made the great
pleasure of their lives. There are rooms convenient enough, that some
men cannot study in, and fashions of vessels, which, though ever so
clean and commodious, they cannot drink out of, and that by reason of
some accidental ideas which are annexed to them, and make them
offensive; and who is there that hath not observed some man to flag at
the appearance, or in the company of some certain person not otherwise
superior to him, but because, having once on some occasion got the
ascendant, the idea of authority and distance goes along with that of
the person, and he that has been thus subjected, is not able to
separate them.

16. A curious instance.

Instances of this kind are so plentiful everywhere, that if I add one
more, it is only for the pleasant oddness of it. It is of a young
gentleman, who, having learnt to dance, and that to great perfection,
there happened to stand an old trunk in the room where he learnt. The
idea of this remarkable piece of household stuff had so mixed itself
with the turns and steps of all his dances, that though in that chamber
he could dance excellently well, yet it was only whilst that trunk was
there; nor could he perform well in any other place, unless that or
some such other trunk had its due position in the room. If this story
shall be suspected to be dressed up with some comical circumstances, a
little beyond precise nature, I answer for myself that I had it some
years since from a very sober and worthy man, upon his own knowledge,
as I report it; and I dare say there are very few inquisitive persons
who read this, who have not met with accounts, if not examples, of this
nature, that may parallel, or at least justify this.

17. Influence of Association on intellectual Habits.

Intellectual habits and defects this way contracted, are not less
frequent and powerful, though less observed. Let the ideas of being and
matter be strongly joined, either by education or much thought; whilst
these are still combined in the mind, what notions, what reasonings,
will there be about separate spirits? Let custom from the very
childhood have joined figure and shape to the idea of God, and what
absurdities will that mind be liable to about the Deity? Let the idea
of infallibility be inseparably joined to any person, and these two
constantly together possess the mind; and then one body in two places
at once, shall unexamined be swallowed for a certain truth, by an
implicit faith, whenever that imagined infallible person dictates and
demands assent without inquiry.

18. Observable in the opposition between different Sects of philosophy
and of religion.

Some such wrong and unnatural combinations of ideas will be found to
establish the irreconcilable opposition between different sects of
philosophy and religion; for we cannot imagine every one of their
followers to impose wilfully on himself, and knowingly refuse truth
offered by plain reason. Interest, though it does a great deal in the
case, yet cannot be thought to work whole societies of men to so
universal a perverseness, as that every one of them to a man should
knowingly maintain falsehood: some at least must be allowed to do what
all pretend to, i.e. to pursue truth sincerely; and therefore there
must be something that blinds their understandings, and makes them not
see the falsehood of what they embrace for real truth. That which thus
captivates their reasons, and leads men of sincerity blindfold from
common sense, will, when examined, be found to be what we are speaking
of: some independent ideas, of no alliance to one another, are, by
education, custom, and the constant din of their party, so coupled in
their minds, that they always appear there together; and they can no
more separate them in their thoughts than if they were but one idea,
and they operate as if they were so. This gives sense to jargon,
demonstration to absurdities, and consistency to nonsense, and is the
foundation of the greatest, I had almost said of all the errors in the
world; or, if it does not reach so far, it is at least the most
dangerous one, since, so far as it obtains, it hinders men from seeing
and examining. When two things, in themselves disjoined, appear to the
sight constantly united; if the eye sees these things riveted which are
loose, where will you begin to rectify the mistakes that follow in two
ideas that they have been accustomed so to join in their minds as to
substitute one for the other, and, as I am apt to think, often without
perceiving it themselves? This, whilst they are under the deceit of it,
makes them incapable of conviction, and they applaud themselves as
zealous champions for truth, when indeed they are contending for error;
and the confusion of two different ideas, which a customary connexion
of them in their minds hath to them made in effect but one, fills their
heads with false views, and their reasonings with false consequences.

19. Conclusion.

Having thus given an account of the original, sorts, and extent of our
IDEAS, with several other considerations about these (I know not
whether I may say) instruments, or materials of our knowledge, the
method I at first proposed to myself would now require that I should
immediately proceed to show, what use the understanding makes of them,
and what KNOWLEDGE we have by them. This was that which, in the first
general view I had of this subject, was all that I thought I should
have to do: but, upon a nearer approach, I find that there is so close
a connexion between ideas and WORDS, and our abstract ideas and general
words have so constant a relation one to another, that it is impossible
to speak clearly and distinctly of our knowledge, which all consists in
propositions, without considering, first, the nature, use, and
signification of Language; which, therefore, must be the business of
the next Book.

END OF VOLUME I



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK AN ESSAY CONCERNING HUMANE UNDERSTANDING, VOLUME 1 ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

The Project Gutenberg eBook of Ancient and Modern Physics
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Ancient and Modern Physics

Author: Thomas Edgar Willson

Release date: January 1, 2004 [eBook #10773]
                Most recently updated: December 20, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jake Jaqua


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS ***




Produced by Jake Jaqua




ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS

by Thomas E. Willson



Contents

Preface
I.     Physical Basis of Metaphysics
II.    The Two Kinds of Perception
III.   Matter and Ether
IV.    What a Teacher Should Teach
V.     The Four Manifested Planes
VI.    One Place on Earth
VII.   The Four Globes
VIII.  The Battle Ground
IX.    The Dual Man
X.     The Septenary World
XI.    Stumbling blocks in Eastern Physics




PREFACE


The Editor of the Theosophical Forum in April, 1901, noted the
death of Mr. Thomas E. Willson in the previous month in an
article which we reproduce for the reason that we believe many
readers who have been following the chapters of "Ancient and
Modern Physics" during the last year will like to know something
of the author.  In these paragraphs is said all that need be said
of one of our most devoted and understanding Theosophists.

In March, 1901, The Theosophical Forum lost one of its most
willing and unfailing contributors.  Mr. T.E. Willson died
suddenly, and the news of his death reached me when I actually
was in the act of preparing the concluding chapter of his
"Ancient and Modern Physics" for the April number.

Like the swan, who sings his one song, when feeling that death is
near, Mr. Willson gave his brother co-workers in the Theosophical
field all that was best, ripest and most suggestive in his
thought in the series of articles the last of which is to come
out in the same number with this.

The last time I had a long talk with T.E. Willson, he said"

"For twenty years and more I was without a hearing, yet my
interest and my faith in what I had to say never flagged, the
eagerness of my love for my subject never diminished."

This needs no comment.  The quiet and sustained resistance to
indifference and lack of appreciation, is truly the steady
ballast which has prevented our Theosophical ship from aimless
and fatal wanderings, though of inclement weather and adverse
winds we had plenty.

For many long years Mr. Willson was the librarian of the New York
"World."  In the afternoons he was too busy to see outsiders,
but, beginning with five o'clock in the afternoon until he went
home somewhere in the neighbourhood of midnight, he always was
glad to see his friends.  He had a tiny little room of his own,
very near the top of the tremendous building, his one window
looking far above the roofs of the tallest houses in the
district.  There he sat at his desk, generally in his shirt
sleeves, if the weather was at all warm, always busy with some
matter already printed, or going to be, a quiet, yet impressive
and dignified figure.

The elevated isolation, both figuratively and literally speaking,
in which T.E. Willson lived and worked, in the midst of the most
crowded thoroughfares of New York, always made me think of
Professor Teufelsdrockh on the attic floor of "the highest
house in the Wahngasse."  The two had more than one point of
resemblance.  They shared the loftiness of their point of view,
their sympathetic understanding of other folks, their loneliness,
and, above all, their patient, even humorous resignation to the
fact of this loneliness.

Yet in his appearance Mr. Willson was not like the great
Weissnichtwo philosopher.  In fact, in the cast of his features
and in his ways, Mr. Willson never looked to me like a white man.
In British India I have known Brahmans of the better type exactly
with the same sallow complexion, same quick and observant brown
eye, same portly figure and same wide-awakeness and agility of
manner.

Last summer I heard, on good authority, that Mr. Willson had
thought himself into a most suggestive way of dealing with the
problems of matter and spirit, a way which, besides being
suggestive, bore a great resemblance to some theories of the same
nature, current in ancient India.  Consequently Mr. Willson was
offered, for the first time in his life, a chance of expressing
his views on matter and spirit in as many articles and in as
extensive a shape as he chose.  The way he received this tardy
recognition of the fact that he had something to say was highly
instructive.  He did not put on airs of unrecognized greatness,
though, I own, the occasion was propitious;  he did not say, "I
told you so;"  he simply and frankly was glad, in, the most
childlike way.

And now that I have used the word, it occurs to me that
"childlike" is an adjective the best applied to this man, in
spite of his portliness, and his three score and more winters.

Many a pleasant hour I have spent in the small bookroom of the
great "World" building.  With Mr. Willson talk never flagged.  We
discussed the past and the future of our planetary chain, we
built plans for the true and wholesome relation of sexes, we
tried to find out--and needless to say never did--the exact
limit where matter stopped being matter and became spirit;  we
also read the latest comic poems and also, from time to time, we
took a header into the stormy sea of American literature in order
to find out what various wise heads had to say, consciously or
unconsciously, in favour of our beloved Theosophical views.  And
all this, being interrupted every three minutes or so by some
weary apparition from some workroom in the "World" with some such
question:  "Mr. Willson, how am I to find out the present
whereabouts of this or that Russian man-of-war?  Mr. Willson,
what is the melting point of iron?  Mr. Willson, when was `H.M.S.
Pinafore' produced for the first time?" etc., etc.  And every
time, Mr. Willson got up in the leisurely manner peculiar to him,
reached for some book from the shelves that lined the room, gave
the desired information, and as leisurely returned to the "pranic
atom," or to "come and talk man talk, Willy," or to whatever our
subject chanced to be at the time.

Mr. Willson's gratitude to the Theosophical Forum for its
recognition was disproportionately great.  As he wrote to the
Editor:  "give me any kind of work, writing for you, reviewing,
manuscript or proof reading, I shall do anything, I shall
undertake any job, even to taking editorial scoldings in all good
nature, only give me work."  His devotion to Theosophical thought
and work in all their ramifications was just as great, as was his
freedom from vanity, his perfectly natural and unaffected
modesty.

At the news of his death many a heart was sincerely sad, but none
so sad as the heart of the editor of the Theosophical Forum.  For
a friend and co-worker like T.E. Willson, ever ready to give
material help and moral encouragement, is not easily replaced.

For a soul so pure of any kind of selfishness the transition from
the turmoil of life to the bright dreams of death must have been
both easy and enviable.
--------------




Chapter One

The Physical Basis if Metaphysics


The Hindu system of physics, on which the metaphysical thought of
the East is based, does not in its beginnings differ widely from
the latest physics of the West;  but it goes so much farther that
our physics is soon lost sight of and forgotten.  The Hindu
conception of the material universe, taken from the Upanishads
and some open teaching, will serve for an illustration.  They
divide physical matter into four kinds--prakriti, ether, prana,
and manasa--which they call "planes."  These differ only in the
rate of vibration, each plane vibrating through one great octave,
with gulfs of "lost" octaves between.  The highest rate of
vibration of prakriti is measured by the thousand, the lowest of
the ether by trillions, and the lowest of prana by--never mind;
they have, and we have not, the nomenclature.

The earth, they teach, is a globe of prakriti, floating in an
ocean of ether, which, as it has the sun for its center of
gravity, must necessarily be a globe.  This etheric sun-globe has
a diameter of over 300,000,000,000 miles.  All the planets
revolve around the sun far within its atmosphere.  The etheric
sun-globe revolves on its axis once in about 21,000 years, and
this revolution causes the precession of the equinoxes.  This
etheric sun-globe is revolving around Alcyone with other etheric
globes having suns for their centers and solar systems of
prakritic globes within them in a great year of 5,640,000,000 of
our common years.  Its orbit has a diameter of
93,000,000,000,000,000 miles.

Beyond the etheric globes, and between them, is a third form of
matter called prana, as much rarer and finer than the ether as
the ether is rarer and finer than prakriti.  As this prana has
Alcyone for a center of gravity, it is necessarily a globe;  and
there are many of these pranic globes floating in a vast ocean of
manasa--a form of matter as much finer than prana as prana is
finer than ether, or ether than prakriti.  With this manasa
(which is a globe) the material, or physical, universe ends;  but
there are spiritual globes beyond.  The material universe is
created from manasa, downward, but it does not respond to or
chord with the vibration of the globes above, except in a special
instance and in a special way, which does not touch this inquiry.

The physical universe of the ancient (and modern) Hindu physicist
was made up of these four kinds or planes of matter, distributed
in space as "globes within globes."

Professor Lodge in 1884 put forth the theory that prakriti
(physical matter) as we call it, was in its atoms but "whirls" of
ether.  Since then speculative science has generally accepted the
idea that the physical atom is made up of many cubic feet of
ether in chemical union, as many quarts of oxygen and hydrogen
unite chemically to make a drop of water.  This is an old story
to the Hindu sage.  He tells his pupils that the great globe of
manasa once filled all space, and there was nothing else.
Precisely as on this earth we have our elementary substances that
change from liquids into solids and gases, so on this manasic
globe there were elementary substances that took the form of
liquids, solids and gases.  Its manasic matter was differentiated
and vibrated through one octave, as the prakritic matter does on
the earth.  Its substances combined as that does.

One combination produced prana.  The prana collected, and formed
globes.  On these pranic globes the process was repeated, with
ether as the result, and the etheric globes formed.  Then the
process was repeated on the etheric globes, as the modern
scientists have discovered, and prakriti and prakritic globes
came into being.

The true diameter of the earth, the ancient Hindu books say, is
about 50,000 miles.  That is to say, the true surface of the
earth is the line of twenty-four-hour axial rotation;  the line
where gravity and apergy exactly balance;  where a moon would
have to be placed to revolve once in 86,400 seconds.  Within that
is prakriti;  without is ether.  It is also the line of no
friction, which does exist between matter of different planes.
There is friction between prakriti, between ether, between prana;
but not between ether and prana, or ether and prakriti.  Friction
is a phenomenon confined to the matter of each plane separately.
We live at the bottom of this gaseous ocean--on its floor
--21,000 miles from the surface and only 4,000 miles from the
center.  Here, in a narrow "skin" limited to a few miles above
and below us, is the realm of phenomena, where solid turns into
liquid and liquid into gas, or vice versa.  The lesson impressed
upon the pupil's mind by Hindu physics is that he lives far
within the earth, not on it.

There is a comparatively narrow "skin" of and for phenomena
within the etheric sun-globe, say the Eastern teachers, where the
etheric solids, liquids, and gases meet and mingle and
interchange.  Within this "skin" are all the planets--the
"gaseous" atmosphere of the etheric globe stretching millions of
miles beyond the outermost planetary orbit.  The earth is in this
skin or belt of etheric phenomena, and its ether is in touch with
the ether "in manifestation" on the etheric globe.  The sun and
other etheric globes are within the corresponding "skin" of
phenomena of the pranic globes.  The prana, manifesting as solid,
liquid, and gas, or in combination and in forms, is in perfect
touch with that of the etheric globe, and through that with the
prana of the earth.  That our prana is in touch with that on the
pranic globe in all its manifestations means much in metaphysics.
The same is true of the manasic globe, and of our manasa.

The great lesson the Eastern physics burns into the pupil is that
we are living not only within the prakritic earth, but within
each of the other globes as well in identically the same way and
subject to the same laws.  Our lives are not passed on one globe,
but in four globes.  It is as if one said he lived in Buffalo,
Erie county, New York, United States;  that he was a citizen of
each and subject to the laws of each.

This question of the four globes, of the four planes of matter,
of the four skins, and of the four conditions or states of all
matter and necessarily of all persons, from the purely material
standpoint, is not only the foundation of Oriental physics, but
the very essence of Oriental metaphysics--its starting-point and
corner-stone.  To one who carries with him, consciously or
unconsciously, the concrete knowledge of the physics, the
abstract teaching of the metaphysics presents no difficulty;  it
is as clear as crystal.  But without the physical teaching the
metaphysical is not translatable.

Our Western physics teaches that physical matter is divided into
two kinds prakriti (commonly called "physical matter") and ether;
that the differences of each of the elementary prakritic
substances (iron, copper, sulphur, oxygen) are in their
molecules, the fundamental atom being the same;  that each of
these elementary substances vibrates only through one octave,
though on different keys;  that it changes from solid to liquid
and gas as the rate of vibration is increased and from gas to
liquid and solid as its vibration is decreased within its octave;
that the ether obeys identical laws;  that it has elementary
substances vibrating through one octave only, and that these are
solids, liquids, or gases on the etheric plane as prakriti is on
this;  that these etheric substances change and combine in every
way that prakriti does;  and that while all our prakritic
substances vibrate within (say) fifty simply octaves, the lowest
vibration of etheric matter begins over one thousand octaves
beyond our highest, making a gulf to leap.  The Eastern physics
presents this with a wealth of detail that dazes the Western
student, and then adds:  "But beyond the etheric plane (or
octave) of vibration for matter there is a third plane (or
octave) of vibration called prana and beyond that a fourth called
manasa.  What is true of one plane is true of the other three.
One law governs the four.  As above so below.  There is no real
gulf;  there is perfect continuity."

The Western scientist teaches as the foundation of modern physics
that "each and every atom of prakritic matter is the center of an
etheric molecule of many atoms;"  that "no two prakritic atoms
touch," although their etheric envelopes or atmospheres do touch;
and that "all physical phenomena are caused by the chording
vibration of the prakritic atom and its envelope of ether," each
"sounding the same note hundreds of octaves apart."  The "solid
earth" with its atmosphere represents the atom with its ether.
As all the oxygen and hydrogen do not combine to make the drop of
water, some remaining in mechanical union to give it an
atmosphere, and about one-fourth of its bulk being gas, so the
atom formed of the ether does not use all the ether in its
chemical union, retaining some in mechanical union for its
envelope or atmosphere.

The Hindu physics goes much farther along this road.  It says
that, when the pranic globes were formed, each atom of prana had
its manasic envelope--was the center of a manasic molecule.
When the etheric globes formed, each atom of ether was the center
of a pranic molecule, each atom of which was surrounded with
manasa.  When the prakriti was formed from the ether, each and
every atom of prakriti had the triple etheric-pranic-manasic
envelope.  "Each and every prakritic atom is the center of an
etheric molecule," says our Western science;  but that of the
East adds this:  "And each atom of that etheric molecule is the
center of a pranic molecule, and each atom of prana in that
pranic molecule is the center of a manasic molecule."  The four
great globes of matter in the material universe are represented
and reproduced in each and every atom of prakriti, which is in
touch with each one of the four globes and a part of it.  The
same is true of any aggregation of prakriti--of the earth itself
and of all things in it, including man.  As there are four
atoms in each one, so there are four earths, four globes,
consubstantial, one for each of the four elements, and in touch
with it.  One is formed of prakritic atoms--the globe we know;
another, of the ether forming their envelopes;  another, of the
prana envelopes of ether, and a fourth of the manasa around the
pranic atom.  They are not "skins";  they are consubstantial.
And what is true of atoms or globes is true of animals.  Each has
four "material" bodies, with each body on the corresponding globe
--whether of the earth or of the Universe.  This is the physical
basis of the famous "chain of seven globes" that is such a
stumbling-block in Hindu metaphysics.  The spirit passes through
four to get in and three to get out--seven in all.  The Hindu
understands without explanation.  He understands his physics.

The Hindu physics teaches, with ours, that "the ether is the
source of all energy," but, it adds, "as prana is the source of
all life, and manasa of all mind."

"When the prakritic atom is vibrating in chord with its etheric
envelope," say our textbooks, "we have physical phenomena
--light, heat, electricity."  "Yes," says the Hindu teacher;  "but
when the atom and its ether and its prana are vibrating in chord,
we have life and vital phenomena added to the energy.  When the
atom and its ether, prana, and manasa are vibrating in chord, we
have mind and mental phenomena added to the life and energy."
Each atom has energy, life, and mind in posse.  In the living
leaf the prakriti, ether, and prana are sounding the threefold
silver chord of life.  In the animal, the manasa is sounding the
same note with them, making the fourfold golden chord of mind.
  Even in the plant there may be a faint manasic overtone, for
the potentiality of life and mind is in everything.  This unity
of the physical universe with the physical atom, and with all
things created--earth, animal, or crystal--is the physical
backbone of Oriental metaphysics.  Prakriti, ether, prana, and
manasa are in our vernacular the Earth, Air, Fire, and Water of
the old philosophers--the "Four Elements."

The Oriental physics has been guarded most jealously.  For many
thousands of years it has been the real occult and esoteric
teaching, while the Oriental metaphysics has been open and
exoteric.  It could not be understood without the key, and the
key was in the physics known only to "the tried and approved
disciple."  A little has leaked out--enough to whet the appetite
of the true student and make him ask for more.




Chapter Two

The Two Kinds of Perception


To the savage, matter appears in two forms--solid and liquid.
As he advances a step he learns it has three forms--solid,
liquid and gas.  He cannot see the gas, but he knows it is there.

A little further on he learns that matter as he knows it is only
a minute portion of the great universe of matter--the few chords
that can be struck on the five strings of his senses, and limited
to one octave or key.

Whether the particular matter he investigates has a solid, a
liquid, or a gaseous form depends upon its rate of vibration.  If
it is a liquid, by raising its rate of vibration one third it
becomes a gas;  by reducing it one third it becomes a solid.

Each kind of matter has vibration only through one octave.  It is
known to us only by its vibration in that octave.  Each kind of
matter has a different octave--is set on a higher or lower key,
so to speak, but all octaves of vibration are between the highest
of hydrogen gas and the lowest of carbon.

In mechanical compounds, such as air or brass, the rate of
vibration of the compound is the least common multiple of the two
or more rates.  In chemical compounds, such as water or alcohol,
the rate is that of the highest, the others uniting in harmonic
fractions.

All matter as we know it through our senses--prakriti, as it is
called in the Secret Doctrine to distinguish it from non-sensual
matter--is the vibration of an universal Something, we do not
know what, through these different octaves.  The elementary
substances (so-called) are one and the same thing--this
Something--in different keys and chords of vibration;  keys that
run into one another, producing all sorts of beautiful harmonies.

Taking any one of these elements, or any of their compounds, all
we know of it is limited strictly to its changes during vibration
through one octave.  What happens when the vibration goes above
or below the octave has not yet been treated hypothetically.

While some elements are vibrating on higher and some on lower
keys, we can consider them all as vibrating within one great
octave, that octave of the universal Something which produces
sensual matter, or prakriti.

But matter is not confined, we know, to this great octave,
although our sensual knowledge of it is strictly confined to it.
How do we know it?

Knowledge comes to us in two ways, and there are two kinds of
knowledge.

1. That which comes through our senses, by observation and
experience.  This includes reasoning from relation.

2. That which comes through intuition--or, as some writers
inaccurately say, "through the formal laws of thought."

All the observation and experience of the rising and the setting
of the sun for a thousand centuries could only have confirmed the
first natural belief that it revolved daily around the earth;
nor by joining this experience with other experiences could any
deduction have come from our reason that would have opposed it.
Not our reason but our intuition said that the sun stood still
and the earth revolved daily.  The oldest books in existence tell
us that this axial revolution of the earth was not only known in
the very dawn of time but that it has been known to every race
(except our own of European savages) from before the time thought
was first transmitted by writing.

Ask the ablest living geographer or physicist to prove to you
that the earth revolves daily and he will reply that it would be
the job of his life.  It can be done at great expense and great
labor, but that is because we know the answer and can invent a
way of showing it, not because there are any observations from
which a deduction would naturally follow.

Nearly if not all our great discoveries have come to us through
intuition and not from observation and experience.  When we know
the lines on which to work, when intuition has given us the KEY,
then the observation and experience men prize so highly, and the
reason they worship so devoutly, will fill in the details.  The
knowledge that flows from observation and the reasoning from the
facts it records, is never more than relatively true, it is
always limited by the facts, and any addition to the facts
requires the whole thing to be restated.  We never know all the
facts;  seldom even the more important;  and reason grasps only
details.

Lamarck's theory of evolution, known to all Asiatic races from
time immemorial, was the intuitional and absolute knowledge that
comes to all men when they reach a certain stage of development.
Reason could never have furnished it from the facts, as Cuvier
proved in the great debate in the French Academy in 1842, when he
knocked Lamarck out, for the time being, because "it did not
conform to the facts, and did not follow from any relation of the
facts."

Darwin's theory of the survival of the fittest in the struggle
for existence, as an explanation of the origin of species, was
from observation and experience.  It was based on observed facts.
But Darwin was an evolutionist--a disciple of Lamarck.  He held
the Key.  He used the Key.  The value of Darwin's work does not
lie in his discovering that some bugs have been derived from
other bugs and that the intermediate bugs have died off.  Its
overwhelming value to mankind was in showing that work on the
theory of evolution was correct work and that the theory was
true.  When the intuition of man points out the way the reason of
man can follow the path and macadam the road.  It usually does
and claims all the credit for itself as the original discoverer.

This knowledge through intuition is absolute and exact.  It is
not relatively true.  It is absolutely and invariably true.  No
additional facts will ever modify it, or require a restatement.

When Sir William Hamilton based his Logic on the dictum that "All
knowledge is relative, and only relatively true," the proposition
was self-evidently false.  It was in itself a statement of
absolute knowledge about a certain thing.  It was in itself
knowledge that was not relative.  All knowledge could not be
relative if this knowledge was not.  This knowledge could not
be either absolute or relative without upsetting his whole
proposition, for, if relative, then it was not always true;
and if absolute, then it was never true.

Sir William did not know the distinction between the two kinds of
knowledge, and what he meant to say was that "All knowledge
obtained by observation and experience is relative, and only
relatively true."

His knowledge of this relativity was not obtained by observation
or from reason.  It could not possibly have been obtained in that
way.  It came from intuition, and it was absolute and exact.  A
man may have absolute and exact knowledge and yet not be able to
put it into words that exactly express it to another.  Hamilton
had this knowledge.  But it was not clearly formulated even in
his own mind.  He had two separate and distinct meanings for the
word "knowledge," without being conscious of it.

We have yet to coin a proper word to express what comes to us
through intuition.  The old English word "wisdom" originally did.
The old verb "wis" was meant what a man knew without being told
it, as "ken" meant knowledge by experience.  Try and prove by
reason that a straight line is the shortest distance between two
points, or that a part can never be greater than the whole, and
your reason has an impossible task.  "You must take them for
axioms," it says.  You must take them because you wis them, not
because you know (ken) them.

Intuitional knowledge must not be confounded with the relative
knowledge that flows through the reason:  that "If the sum of two
numbers is one and their difference is five," the numbers are
minus two and plus three.

The point cannot be too strongly enforced that there is a
distinction between the sources of what we know, and that while
all we know through our sensations is only relatively true, that
which we know from intuition is invariably and absolutely true.
This is seen through a glass darkly, in theology, where intuition
is called inspiration and not differentiated from reason.

The false notion that we can only learn by observation and
experience, that the concept can never transcend the observation,
that we can only know what we can prove to our senses, has
wrought incalculable injury to progress in philosophy.

Because our sensual knowledge of matter begins and ends with
vibration in one octave it does not follow that this ends our
knowledge of it.  We may have intuitional knowledge, and this
intuitional knowledge is as susceptible to reason as if we had
obtained it by observation.

The knowledge that comes through intuition tells us of matter
vibrating in another great octave just beyond our own, which
Science has chosen to name the etheric octave, or plane.  The
instant our intuition reveals the cause of phenomena our reason
drops in and tells us it is the chording vibration of the matter
of the two planes--the physical and etheric--that produces all
physical phenomena.  It goes further and explains its variations.

This knowledge of another octave or plane of matter comes from
the logical relations of matter and its physical phenomena;  but
there was nothing in the observation or experience of mankind
that would have led us to infer from reason an etheric plane of
matter.  It was "revealed" truth.  But the flash of revelation
having once made the path apparent, the light of reason carries
us through all the winding ways.  Our knowledge of the ether is
not guess-work or fancy, any more than our geometry is, because
it is based on axioms our reason cannot prove.  In both cases the
basic axioms are obtained from intuition;  the structural work
from reason.  Our knowledge of the ether may be as absolute and
exact as our knowledge of prakriti, working on physical as we
work on geometrical axioms.

The recognition of the two sources of knowledge, the work of the
spirit within us and of the mind within us, is absolutely
necessary to correctly comprehend the true significance of the
results of modern science and to accept the ancient.




Chapter Three

Matter and Ether


It is not worthwhile translating Homer into English unless the
readers of the translation understand English.

It is not worthwhile attempting to translate the occult Eastern
physics into the language of our Western and modern physics,
unless those who are to read the translation understand generally
and broadly what our own modern physics teach.  It is not
necessary that they should know all branches of our modern
physics in all their minute ramifications;  but it is necessary
that they should understand clearly the fundamental principles
upon which our scientific and technical knowledge of today rests.

These fundamental principles have been discovered and applied in
the past fifty years--in the memory of the living.  They have
revolutionized science in all its departments.  Our textbooks on
Chemistry, Light, Heat, Electricity and Sound have had to be
entirely re-written;  and in many other departments, notably in
medicine and psychology, they have yet to be re-written.  Our
textbooks are in a transition state, each new one going a step
farther, to make the change gradual from the old forms of belief
to the new, so that even Tyndall's textbook on "Sound" is now so
antedated, or antiquated, that it might have been written in
darkest Africa before the pyramids were built, instead of twenty
years ago.

All this change has flowed from the discovery of Faraday that
there are two states or conditions of matter.  In one it is
revealed by one of our five senses, visible, tangible, smellable,
tastable, or ponderable matter.  This is matter as we know it.
It may be a lump of metal or a flask of gas.

The second condition or state of matter is not revealed by either
of our five senses, but by the sixth sense, or intuition of man.
This is the ether--supposed to be "matter in a very rarefied
form, which permeates all space."  So rare and fine is this
matter that it interpenetrates carbon or steel as water
interpenetrates a sponge, or ink a blotting pad.  In fact, each
atom of "physical" matter--by which is meant matter in the first
condition--floats in an atmosphere of ether as the solid earth
floats in its atmosphere of air.

"No two physical atoms touch," said Faraday.  "Each physical atom
is the centre of an etheric molecule, and as far apart from every
other atom as the stars in heaven from one another."  This is
true of every form of physical matter, whether it is a lump of
metal, a cup of liquid, or a flask of gas;  whether it is a
bronze statue or a living man;  a leaf, a cloud, or the earth
itself.  Each and every physical atom is the centre of an etheric
molecule made up of many atoms of the ether.

This duality of matter was a wonderful discovery, revolutionizing
every department of science.  It placed man in actual touch with
the whole visible universe.  The ether in a man's eye (and in his
whole body) reaches in one unbroken line--like a telegraph wire
--from him to the sun, or the outermost planet.  He is not
separate and apart from "space," but a part of it.  Each physical
atom of his physical body is the centre of an etheric molecule,
and he has two bodies, as St. Paul said, a visible physical and
an invisible etheric body;  the latter in actual touch with the
whole universe.

Faraday went one step further.  He demonstrated that all
physical phenomena come from the chording vibration of the
physical atom with the surrounding etheric atoms, and that the
latter exercise the impelling force on the former.  Step into the
sunshine.  The line of ether from the sun is vibrating faster
than the ether in the body, but the higher impels the lower, the
greater controls the lesser, and soon both ethers are in unison.
The physical atoms must coincide in vibration with their etheric
envelopes, and the "note" is "heat."  Step into the shade, where
the ocean of ether is vibrating more slowly, and the ether of the
body reduces its vibration.  "The ether is the origin of all
force and of all phenomena."

This etheric matter follows identical laws with prakritic matter,
or, accurately, the laws of our matter flow from the etheric
matter from which it is made.  The ether has two hundred or more
elementary substances, each atom of our eighty or ninety
"elements" being the chemical union of great masses of two or
more of the etheric elements or their combinations.  These
etheric elementary substances combine and unite;  our elementary
substances simply following in their combinations the law which
they inherit from their parents.  They take form and shape.  They
vibrate through one octave, and take solid liquid or gaseous form
in ether, as their types here in our world take it in prakriti,
as their vibrations are increased or diminished.  In short, the
ether is the prototype of our physical or prakritic world, out of
which it is made and a product of which it is.

As this ether is "physical" matter, the same as prakriti, one
harmonic law covering both, and as this ether fills all space,
Modern Science divides physical matter into two kinds, which, for
convenience in differentiation, are here called prakritic and
etheric.

Matter is something--science does not know or care to know what
--in vibration.  A very low octave of vibration produces
prakriti;  a very high octave of vibration produces ether.  The
vibration of prakriti ends in thousands;  that of ether begins in
billions.  Between them there is a gulf of vibrations that has
not yet been bridged.  For that reason science divides matter
into two "planes," or octaves, of vibration--the matter of this
visible and tangible plane being called prakriti and that of the
invisible and intangible plane being called etheric.  Across this
gulf the two planes respond to each other, note for note, the
note in trillions chording when the note in thousands is struck.
Note for note, chord for chord, they answer one another, and the
minutest and the most complex phenomena are alike the result of
this harmonic vibration, that of the ether supplying Force and
that of the prakriti a Medium in which it can manifest.

This knowledge of ether is not guesswork or fancy, and, while it
is as impossible of proof as the axioms of geometry, it is worthy
the same credence and honor.  We are working on physical axioms
exactly as we work on geometrical axioms.

Modern science represents each and every prakritic atom as a
globe like the earth, floating in space and surrounded by an
atmosphere of ether.  "The subdivision of prakritic matter until
we reach etheric atoms chemically united to make the physical
unit" is the correct definition of an atom.  The prakritic
physical atom has length, breadth and thickness.  And it has an
atmosphere of ether which not only interpenetrates the atom as
oxygen and hydrogen interpenetrate the drop of water, but
furnishes it with an envelope as the oxygen and hydrogen furnish
the drop of water with one.

Each physical atom is the centre of an etheric molecule composed
of many etheric atoms vibrating at a greater or lesser speed and
interpenetrating the atom.  Each may be considered a miniature
earth, with its aerial envelope, the air, penetrating all parts
of it.

The etheric plane of matter not only unites with this prakritic
plane through the atom but it interpenetrates all combinations of
it;  beside the atom as well as through the atom.  The grain of
sand composed of many prakritic atoms is also composed of many
times that number of etheric atoms.  The grain of sand is etheric
matter as well as prakritic matter.  It exists on the etheric
plane exactly the same as it exists on the prakritic, and it has
etheric form as well as prakritic form.

As each atom of this physical world of ours--whether of land, or
water, or air;  whether of solid, liquid or gas--is the centre
of an etheric molecule, we have two worlds, not one:  a physical
world and an etheric one;  a visible world and an invisible
world;  a tangible world and an intangible world;  a world of
effect and a world of cause.

And each animal, including man, is made in the same way.  He has
a prakritic body and an etheric body;  a visible body and an
invisible body;  an earthly body and one "not made with hands,"
in common touch with the whole universe.




Chapter Four

What a Teacher Should Teach


Let us suppose that a certain wise teacher of physics places a
row of Bunsen burners under a long steel bar having a Daniell's
pyrometer at one end, and addresses his class (substantially) as
follows:

"At our last lecture we found that the matter of the universe
permeated all space, but in two conditions, which we agreed to
call physical and etheric, or tangible and intangible.  It is all
the same matter, subject to the same laws, but differing in the
rate of vibration, the physical matter vibrating through one
great octave or plane, and the etheric vibrating through another
great octave or plane one degree higher--the chording vibration
of the matter of the two planes in one note producing what we
call energy or force, and with it phenomena.

"This is a bar of steel 36 inches long.  It is composed of
physical atoms but no two physical atoms touch.  Each physical
atom is as far apart from every other atom as the stars in heaven
from one another--in proportion to their size.  The atoms and
the spaces between them are so small to our sight that they seem
to touch.  If we had a microscope of sufficient power to reveal
the atom, you would see that no two atoms touch, and that the
spaces between them are, as Faraday says, very great in
proportion to their size.  I showed you last term that what
appeared to be a solid stream of water, when magnified and thrown
upon a screen, was merely a succession of independent drops that
did not touch.  I can not yet give you proof of the bar of iron
being composed of independent atoms, but that is the fault of our
instruments, and you must take my word for it until the proof is
simplified and made easy of application.

"Each one of these physical atoms is a miniature world.  It is
the center of an ocean of ether, composed of many atoms;  and
while no two physical atoms touch, their etheric atmospheres do
touch, and any change in the vibration of the etheric atmosphere
of one will be imparted to that of the next.  As the vibration of
the physical atom must be in harmony with that of its etheric
atmosphere, any change coming to one will be imparted to the
next, and the next, through the ether surrounding them.

"You can see that the index at the end of the bar has moved,
showing that it is now longer.  That means the etheric atoms are
now vibrating faster, taking more space, and have necessarily
forced each physical atom farther apart.  The bar is not only
longer, but softer, and as the vibrations increase in rapidity
the time will come when it will bend by its own weight, and even
when it will become a liquid and a gas.

"If you put your hand anywhere near the bar you will feel a
sensation called heat, and say it has become hot.  The reason for
that is that you are in actual and literal touch with the bar or
iron through the ether.  It is not alone each atom of the bar of
iron that is surrounded by the ether, but each atom of the air,
and each atom of your body.  Their etheric atmospheres are all
touching, and the increase in the vibration of the ether
surrounding the atoms of iron is imparted to those of the air
surrounding it, and these in turn raise the rate of vibration in
the etheric atoms surrounding the physical atoms of your hand.
This rate of vibration in your nerves causes a sensation, or
mental impression, you call "heat."  Consciousness of it comes
through your sense of touch;  but after all it is merely a "rate
of vibration" which your brain recognizes and names.

"The bar has now reached a temperature of about 700 degrees, and
has become a dull red.  Why do you say the color has changed, and
why do you say red?

"Because the rate of vibration of the etheric atoms in the bar is
now about 412 trillions per second, and this rate of vibration
having been imparted to the ether of the air, has in turn been
imparted to the ether of your eye, and this rate of vibration in
the ether of the nerves of your eye your brain recognizes and
calls 'red.'

"The heat still continues and increases.  You now have both heat
and light.  So you see that the ether is not vibrating in a
single note, but in two chording notes, producing light and heat.
There are two kinds of ether around the iron atom.  There is
sound also, but the note is too high for one's ears.  It is a
chord of three notes.

"Professor Silliman, of Yale, discovered over twenty years ago,
that the ether could be differentiated into the luminiferous, or
light ether, and the sonoriferous, or sound ether.

"Other great scientists since then have found a third ether--the
heat ether.

"Their discoveries show that the atmospheric etheric envelope of
each etheric atom is made up of etheric atoms of different
vibratory powers.  As the atmosphere of the earth is made up of
atoms of oxygen and nitrogen and argon, so that of an atom is
made up of three kinds of ethers, corresponding to three of our
senses.  That it consists of five ethers, corresponding to our
five senses, as the ancient Hindus assert--who can say?

"I mention this subject of the differentiation of the ether
merely that you may not suppose that the ether is a simple
substance.  For the present we will treat it as a simple
substance, but next year we will take it up as a compound one.

"This steel bar before you is not one bar, but two bars.  There
is a visible bar and an invisible bar, the visible bar being made
of physical atoms, and the invisible bar of etheric atoms.  The
etheric bar is invisible, but it is made of matter, the same as
the visible bar, and it is just as real, just as truly a bar as
the one we see.

"More than this.  The etheric, invisible bar is the source and
cause of all phenomena connected with the bar.  It is the real
bar, and the one we see is merely the shadow in physical matter
of a real bar.  In shape, strength, color, in short, in
everything, it depends on the invisible one.  The invisible
dominates, governs, disposes.  The visible is merely its
attendant shadow, changing as the invisible, etheric bar changes,
and recording for our senses these invisible changes.

"The invisible change always comes first;  the invisible
phenomena invariably precede the visible.

"In all this physical world--in all this universe--there is
nothing, not even a grain of sand or an atom of hydrogen, that is
not as this bar of iron is--the shadow cast on a visible world
by the unknown and mysterious work of an invisible world.

"Land or water, mountain or lake, man or beast, bird or reptile,
cold or heat, light or darkness, all are the reflection in
physical matter of the true and real thing in the invisible and
intangible world about us.  "If we have a visible body we have an
invisible one also," said Saint Paul.  Modern science has proven
he was right, and that it is the invisible body which is the real
body.

"If this earth and all that it is composed of--land or ocean or
air;  man or beast;  pyramid or pavement--could be resolved into
the physical atoms composing everything in it or on it created by
God or man, each atom of this dust would be identical physically.
There would not be one kind of atom for iron and another for
oxygen.

"The differentiation between what are called elementary
substances is first made apparent in the molecule or first
combination of the atoms.  It is not in the atom itself, unless
it be in the size, as may not be improbable.  The atoms combine
in different numbers to make differently shaped molecules, and it
is from this difference in the shape of the molecule that we get
the difference between gold and silver, copper and tin, or oxygen
and hydrogen.

"In all chemical compounds, such as water and alcohol, the
molecules at the base of the two or more substances break up into
their original atoms and form a new molecule composed of all the
atoms in the two or more things combined.  To make this chemical
combination we must change the rate of vibration of one or the
other or both until they strike a common chord.  As we saw last
term, oxygen and hydrogen have different specific heats, and no
two other elements have the same specific heat, while heat raises
the rate of vibration.  Any given amount of heat raises the
vibration of one more than another.  Apply heat, and the rate of
one will rise faster than that of the other until they reach a
common chord.  Then they fall apart and recombine.

"If we pass a current of electricity through this sealed jar
containing oxygen and hydrogen in mechanical union, the spark
that leaps across the points furnishes the heat, and a drop of
water appears and falls to the bottom.  A large portion of the
gases has disappeared.  It has been converted into water.  What
is left of the gases will expand and fill the bottle.

"The drop of water but for local causes, but for a certain
attraction of the earth, would float in the centre of the jar at
the centre of gravity, as the earth does in space.  But the
centre of gravity of the two bodies is far within the earth, and
the drop gets as close to it as it can.  The earth's 'pull' takes
it to the bottom.  If the jar were far enough away in space the
drop would float, as the earth floats, at a point where all pulls
balance, and the drop of water would have enough pull of its own,
enough gravity within itself to hold all the gas left in the jar
to itself as an atmosphere.  It would be a centre of energy, a
minature world.

"The drop of water is not a homogenous mass.  About one third of
the bulk of the drop of water is made up of independent oxygen
and hydrogen atoms interspersed through it, as any liquid is
through this piece of blotting paper.  And it has, and keeps, by
its own attraction, an atmosphere of the gas.  Each molecule of
water has a thin layer, or skin, of the gas;  even as it comes
from this faucet.

"Let us return again to the physical dust, the atom.  Why should
it form by fives for iron, by nines for hydrogen?  Where did the
atom come from?  What is it?  We know that like the drop of
water, it is a miniature world with an atmosphere of ether;  and
the natural inference is that it is made from ether as the drop
of water was made from gas.  Many things confirm this inference,
and it may be accepted as 'a working hypothesis' that it is made
from ether as the drop of water is made from gas, by the chemical
union of a large amount of ether of different kinds, the etheric
molecules of which consist of 2 and 3 or 5 and 4 etheric atoms,
and that the tendency to combine in this or that number in
physical matter is an inherited tendency brought with it from the
etheric world of matter on which, or in which, each element of
this world is two or more.  There is no kind of matter in this
physical world, that has not its prototype in the etheric, and
the laws of its action and reaction here are laws which it
inherits and brings with it.  They are not laws made here.  They
are laws of the other world--even as the matter itself is matter
of the other world.

"In 1882, Professor Lodge, in a lecture before the Royal
Institution on 'The Luminiferous Ether' defined it as:

"'One continuous substance, filling all space, which can vibrate
as light, which can be sheared into positive and negative
electricity, which in whirls constitutes matter, and which
transmits by continuity and not impact every action and reaction
of which matter is capable.'

"This reads today like baby-talk but at that time (eighteen years
ago), it was considered by many timid conservative scientists as
'a daring movement.'  It is noteworthy in that it was the first
public scientific announcement that the physical matter is a
manifestation or form of the ether.  And it was made before
general acceptance of the division of the ether into soniferous,
luminiferous and tangiferous.

"'Which in whirls constitutes matter.'  Professor Lodge believed
that 'some etheric molecules revolved so rapidly on their axis
that they could not be penetrated.'  Watch the soap-bubbles that
I am blowing.  Each and every one is revolving as the earth
revolves, from west to east.  What I wish to call your attention
to is the fact that can be proven, both mathematically and
theoretically, that at a certain rate of speed in the revolution
they could not be penetrated by any rifle-ball.  At a higher rate
of speed they would be harder than globes of solid chilled steel,
harder even than carbon.  Professor Lodge believed that the
etheric molecule revolved so rapidly that, thin as it was in its
shell, it gave us the dust out of which worlds were made.  There
is one fatal error in this idea, although it is held even now by
many.  It is based entirely on gravity, and gravity is alone
considered in its problems.  There are two great forces in the
universe, not one, as many scientific people fail to remember
--Gravity and Apergy, or the centrifugal and centripetal forces.
The pull in is and must be always balanced by the pull out.
There is in the universe as much repulsion as attraction, and the
former is a force quite as important as the latter.  The bubble's
speed kept increasing until apergy, the tendency to fly off,
overcame gravity, and it ruptured.

"Professor Lodge failed to take into account this apergic force,
this tendency to fly off, when he gave such high revolutionary
speed to the etheric molecules, a speed in which apergy would
necessarily exceed gravity.  The failure to take apergy into
consideration has been the undoing of many physicists.

"Today we know that the ether is matter, the same as our own,
only finer and rarer and in much more rapid vibration.  We know
that this ether has its solids, liquids and gases formed from
molecules of its atoms, even as our own are formed.  We know that
its atoms combine as ours do, and while we have but eighty
elementary combinations, it must have more than double the
number.  We know that every form and shape and combination of
these elements from this plane flows from inherited tendencies
having their root in the etheric world.

"The two worlds are one world--as much at one with ours as the
world of gas about us is at one with our liquids and solids.  It
is 'continuity, not impact.'  They not only touch everywhere and
in everything, but they are one and the same in action and
reaction."

Thus spake a certain wise teacher of physics.  To his wise
utterances, we can only add that such as we are today "we see
through a glass, darkly."  Yet there will come a day when the
physical bandages will be removed from our eyes, and we shall see
face to face the beauty and grandeur and glory of this invisible
world, and that in truth it 'transmits by continuity and not
impact every action and reaction of which matter is capable,'
forming one continuous chain of cause and effect, without a link
missing.  There are no gulfs to cross;  no bridges to be made.
It is here;  not there.  It is at one with us.  And we are at one
with it.  One and the same law controls and guides the etheric
atom and the physical atom made from its molecules, whether the
latter are made in "whirls," as at first supposed, or by orderly
combination as now believed.

In fact, this visible world of ours is the perfect product of the
other invisible one, having in it its root and foundation, the
very sap of its life.




Chapter Five

The Four Manifested Planes

The oriental idea of the universe does not differ fundamentally
in its general conception, from that of modern science, but it
goes farther and explains more.  The physics of the secret
doctrine are based upon a material universe of four planes of
vibration and a spiritual universe of three planes of vibration
beyond matter.  This Something in vibration may be given the
English name, Consciousness--without entering upon its nature.

Spirit is consciousness in vibration and undifferentiated.

Matter is consciousness in vibration and differentiated.

As we divide the seven octaves of a piano into Treble and Bass
for clearness of thought and writing, so the Hidden Knowledge
divides the seven octaves of vibration, or planes, into Spirit
and Matter.  In their ultimate analysis they are one and the same
thing, as ice and water are the same thing;  but for study they
must be differentiated.

The material and physical universe consists of four planes of
matter, or four great octaves of vibration, each differentiated
from the other as in our physics prakriti is differentiated from
ether.  The material universe, the ancient physics teach, was
originally pure thought, Manasa, the product of the spiritual
planes above.  This manasic world was differentiated, a real
world.  That is to say it was given elementary substances by the
union of its atoms in different sized molecules.  Some of its
elements combined and formed Prana.  The prana gathered and
formed other worlds, pranic worlds.  Then in the pranic world
etheric worlds were formed;  and finally in the etheric worlds,
prakritic globes like the earth were formed.  The earth is the
centre of a prakritic globe, revolving in ether around the sun.
The sun is the centre of a solar globe of ether, revolving in
prana around Alcyone.  Alcyone is the centre of a stellar globe
of prana revolving in manasa around the central and hidden sun of
the great manasic globe.  These four conditions of matter
prakriti, ether, prana, and manasa are the earth, water, fire,
air of the Ancient Metaphysics, the four elements of matter, and
are present in every atom of prakriti.  When the atom of prana
was formed, it had an envelope of manasa.  When the atom of ether
was formed it had an envelope of pranic-manasic atoms.  When the
prakritic atom was formed it had an envelope of etheric-pranic-
manasic atoms, each of its encircling etheric atoms being the
centre of a pranic molecule, and each pranic atom of that
molecule being the centre of a manasic molecule.

Each atom of prakriti was the material universe in miniature.  It
held the potentialities of mind, life, and phenomena.  In every
aggregation of atoms, there were the four planes, each in touch
through the Cosmic Mind, its manasa, with other atoms in the
universe, with every other globe of whatever kind.  "As above, so
below," was the secret Key-word.  The unity of all the material
universe in its prakriti, ether, prana and manasa, was the corner
stone of this knowledge.  The three planes above prakriti were
called Astral, and in common speech there was the ordinary
division into two planes, visible and invisible, or "Spirit," as
the invisible was called, and "Matter," as the visible was
called.  Only in the hidden secret doctrine of physics, and in
the open metaphysics which were a "stumbling block" and
"foolishness" to those who had not the "inner light" of the
physics, were the three divisions of the "astral" made known, and
the true distinction between the spirit of the three higher
planes and the matter of the four lower was kept out of the
metaphysics, or only vaguely alluded to.

There is no "oriental science" because the oriental does not
attach the same value to merely physical knowledge that we do.
But that must not be understood to imply that there is no
oriental physics.  In all the matters that interest us now, as
far as principles are concerned, the oriental knew all that we
know.  He knew it thousands of years ago, when our ancestors were
sleeping with the cave bears.

"That is all the good it did him," the scientist says.  No.  That
is not true.  It is perfectly true that the oriental, the
Babylonian who carved on the Black Stone now in the British
Museum the five moons of Jupiter, exposing himself to the
derision of our astronomers prior to their own discovery of the
fifth moon in 1898, did not care particularly whether there were
four moons or five, and had no sale for any telescopes he might
make, for no one else cared particularly.  But it was not true
that he did not care for any and all knowledge that would improve
his spiritual condition by giving him correct ideas of the
universe and of his own part in it.  To him life was more than
meat and the body more than raiment.  He was more afraid of sin
than of ignorance.  We are more afraid of ignorance than of sin.
He preferred to better men's moral condition;  we prefer to
better their physical condition.

If one of the Sages of the East could be called up and put on the
stand to be questioned, he would say, substantially:

"You are right in regard to your ether, and to prakriti being
ether that has been dropped a great octave in vibration.  Your
physical atom is surrounded by a molecule of ether, this molecule
containing many atoms of ether.  The chording vibration does
produce all physical phenomena.

"But where did the ether atom come from?  How can you explain how
and whence life comes, or what it is?  This explains physical,
but how do you explain vital phenomena?

"You are wrong in assuming that all the matter of the universe
apart from the earth or planets is ether and only ether.  The
etheric world in which you are interested ends with your solar
system.  It ends with each solar system, to the people of that
system.  Between each solar system and another there is another
form of matter that is not ether.

"This etheric solar world of ours is very large, many billions of
miles in diameter;  but it is not the whole universe.  You know
that the sun and all its planets are revolving around the star
Alcyone.  Your astronomers told you that years ago, and they have
recently given you the rate of speed as 4,838 miles per hour.

"Did you not see and know that if they had this revolution around
a central sun it must be within a solar globe?

"Did you think that the sun and its planets, and other suns and
their planets, were tearing their way through the ether like so
many fish on a dipsy-hook from a Marblehead fishing smack running
before the wind?

"Did it never occur to you that the ether of this solar system
must be revolving around this central sun?  The whole solar
system, ether and planets, are revolving around Alcyone, and the
reason why their minor revolution around the sun is not affected
by it is because the solar system is a vast globe of ether,
having a thinner and rarer medium to revolve in, the same as our
earth has.  It is the motion of a fly in a moving car.

"Now fix your attention on this globe of ether, this solar globe.
You must do it to get the concept before you.  You have known of
it all your life without once really apprehending it, for you
have never learned to think, or to utilize the knowledge that was
given you.  The idea is as new and as strange as if you had never
known it.

"What lies beyond the surface of the solar globe?  Something
must;  something as much rarer and thinner than the ether as the
ether is rarer and thinner than prakriti.  Can you not guess?

"It is Prana, the life force of the universe.  As prakriti is
made from ether, so ether is made from prana.  It is made in the
same way.  Each atom of the ether is the centre of a molecule of
prana, surrounded by an atmosphere of pranic atoms, exactly as
your prakritic atom is surrounded by an atmosphere of etheric
atoms.  You say that each atom of prakriti is the centre of a
molecule of ether.  So it is.  But each atom of that etheric
molecule is the centre of a pranic molecule.  Each atom of your
physical matter is triple, not double.

"You say that all physical phenomena come from the chording
vibration of the etheric and prakritic atoms of the two planes of
matter.  Yes.  But do you not see that all vital phenomena come
from the chording vibration of the pranic, etheric, and prakritic
atom of the three planes of matter which are in each atom?

"In the living leaf the three planes are sounding in chord in each
atom of it.  In the dead leaf, drying up and falling to pieces,
only the lower two are sounding in chord.  The silver chord has
been broken.

"Each atom of prakriti you say has the potentiality of some kind
of phenomenon.  We add 'and of life also.'  The potentialities of
life are in every atom of prakriti.  Even the atom of iron may
live in the blood.  It cannot become a part of any living
organism until its prana is sounding the chord of life in unison
with the ether and prakriti--the threefold silver chord.

"What is the centre of this prana?  It is Alcyone.  There are
other solar globes beside ours circling around Alcyone, and we
have been considering only our own solar globe of ether.  Alcyone
is the centre of the prana in which they revolve as the sun is
the centre of our ether in which the planets revolve.  As this
prana has a centre around which we revolve with other solar
systems, then it must have a center of gravity.

"Then this prana is a globe.

"The prana does not then fill this material universe.  There must
be yet another form of matter rarer and finer than prana, from
which prana is made, as ether is made from prana and prakriti
from ether.  Have we any other class of phenomena to explain,
except vital and physical?  Yes, there is a very important class,
mental.  And here we have the explanation, if we exercise our
reason.

"These pranic globes are floating in an ocean of manasa, matter
in its rarest form.

"Each atom of prana is formed from manasa, exactly as ether was
formed from prana, and each pranic atom in the universe is the
centre of a manasic molecule, having an atmosphere of manasic
atoms.

"So we are not exact in giving the prakritic atom three planes or
octaves of vibration.  It has four.  You merely surround it with
etheric atoms, and this is correct so far as it goes.  You only
wish to explain physical problems.  But there are other problems
to be explained, problems of life and mind, and the same
knowledge you have explains them as well as the others, if you
simply avail yourself of it.  That you do not consider the atom
as four-fold instead of two-fold is your own fault.  I have not
told you anything you did not already know.  I have only asked
you to apply your present knowledge of physics to these problems
of life and mind, and apply your reasoning powers.

"The chording vibration in an atom of matter of

"The two planes produces Force, or phenomena

"The three planes produces Life--the silver chord

"The four planes produces Mind--the golden chord.

"You say there is no gulf between the prakritic and etheric
worlds;  that it is one continuous world;  and all its phenomena
are by continuity and not impact.  That is true, but it is not
the whole truth.

"There is no gulf to cross between the prakritic and etheric
worlds;  none to cross between that and the manasic.  The four
worlds are one great world, continuous, interchangeable.  Through
the four as well as through the two, there is continuity and not
impact.  Whether it is an atom or a world, the four are there.
Nothing, no combination of atoms, no matter of any kind, however
small or large, can exist in this prakritic world unless it has
the four elements, which from time immemorial our philosophers
have called Earth, Water, Fire, Air, meaning the four globes or
forms of matter in the universe.  We do not have to leave the
earth to live in the etheric globe.  It is here.  Nor do we have
to go millions of miles to reach the pranic globe.  It is here.
The problems of light and heat are no easier than the problems of
birth and death.  The pranic globe is within us;  within
everything.  So is the manasic.

"It is here on these higher planes that the chances for worthy
study are greatest.  At least we think so, though you may not.
We live on the manasic--pranic--etheric globe on precisely the
same terms that we live on this of prakriti, and the problems of
the three are equally open to us.

"If there are any who care to follow up the line of thought I
have opened, who care for the questions that interest us of the
East, I will talk as long as they care to listen, provided they
will not ask for knowledge that will give them power over others,
which cannot fail to be used for evil."

This is but a glimpse of Hindu physics, yet it has helped us in
the metaphysics.  We now understand the chain of globes--in
part.  The earth is fourfold.  As each atom of the earth is
fourfold, so their aggregations give us prakritic earth, an
etheric earth, a pranic earth, and a manasic earth--in
coadunition and not like the skin of an onion.  They are separate
and distinct globes, each on its own plane.  It is four down and
three up for the Angel entering matter, whether from the outmost
boundary of manasic matter, or the surface of the earth, or the
cover of a baseball.  The "chain of globes" in the Secret
Doctrine represents the unity of the material universe.

The three-fold nature of the astral model is revealed, and the
unity of all prakritic things.  But more than that, to many
minds, will be the explanation it gives of why there are but four
planes of vibration in matter;  that the highest form of
development in prakriti shows only four elements, prakriti or
body, sensation or force, life, and mind, and that these last
three, present in all things in esse, become present in posse
when they work together harmonically.




Chapter Six

Our Place on Earth


The next time our wise man from the east was asked to "say a few
words and make his own topic," he spoke, perhaps, as follows:

"How large do you think the earth is?  You answer promptly, 7,912
miles in diameter.  You are as far out of the way as you were in
supposing that our sun could be a centre of gravity of a lot of
planets revolving around it and around Alcyone without being a
globe of ether.  Now that it has been mentioned, you see very
clearly for yourself that it must be a solar globe of ether.  It
follows from one of your physical axioms.  When I tell you why
the earth is and must be about fifty thousand miles in diameter,
you will see that it must be so, and that you knew it all the
time, but never stopped to formulate your knowledge.  You have
had the knowledge for three centuries without applying it.

"It was in 1609 that your greatest astronomer, John Kepler,
announced as one of three harmonic laws by which the universe was
governed, that the squares of the times of the planets were
proportional to the cubes of their distances from the sun;  and
that this law was true in physics and everywhere.  No one of your
scientists has had the wisdom to study out what it meant, and for
three centuries, for 291 years, you have repeated his words like
so many parrots, instead of using the key he gave you to unlock
the mysteries of the universe.  A corollary of his law is that
the planets move in their orbits because they are impelled
thereto between the two forces, and move in a mean curve between
them;  but it was not until 1896 that you discovered that the
mean between two forces is always a curve and never a straight
line.  You have not a text book in a school today that does not
repeat this fundamental and absurd error--which you have known
for three centuries to be an error--that the motion resulting
from a mean between forces is "in a straight line."  The curves
resulting here are not to be measured easily, and are so large
that small segments appear straight lines;  and it was not until
Carpenter demonstrated it mathematically that any one could
believe it true.

"There are two great forces in this universe.  Your grandfathers
called them Centripetal and Centrifugal forces;  your fathers
called them Gravity and Apergy, names which still cling to them;
and you call them Attraction and Repulsion.

"It was Kepler, not Newton, who discovered that Attraction or
Gravity was in inverse proportion to the square of the distance.

"You know the meaning of this mystic phrase, 'as the squares of
the distance.'  You understand that it means the attraction at
two feet is only one-fourth the attraction at one foot;  at four
feet only one-sixteenth;  at eight feet, only one sixty-fourth.

"But who knows or cares for Kepler's great law of Repulsion, or
Apergy?  That was that the 'square of the times are as the cubes
of the distance.'  It has lain fallow for centuries.  No one of
your western physicists has ever studied it, or tried to explain
it.  It remains just where Kepler left it, as the mere law of
orbital revolution of the planets only.

"It is the key to the proper understanding of the universe.

"'The squares of the times are as the cubes of the distance'
means that all motion is the result of two forces acting upon
prakriti, and that where the two forces are balanced, or equal,
the result in motion is a circle or ellipse, the square of the
Repulsion being equal to the cube of the Attraction to make them
equal and produce a circle.  In other cases they produce
hyperbola and parabola.

"This is a little dry--nearly all fundamental knowledge is--but
the reward of patience is great.

"The orbital speed of the earth is about 60,000 miles per hour.
The attraction of the sun exactly equals the repulsion created by
the motion;  more accurately, the speed created by the repulsion.
The result of the two forces working together at exact balance is
a circle.  An ellipse is a circle bent a little, and the ellipse
in which the earth actually moves comes from varying attraction
and repulsion.  Kepler's second law covers that.

"If the orbital speed of the earth were a mile less per hour, or
even a foot less, then the earth would wind up around the sun as
a dog gets wound up with his chain around a tree.  If this speed
were a mile more per hour, then the earth would wind out, each
year getting farther and farther away, until finally it would be
lost.  When the speed is exactly proportional to the pull--that
is, when it is as 1.6 is to 2,--the result is a circular orbit,
the eccentricity of which is caused by certain fluctuations in
the attraction and repulsion.

"Suppose a planet were to be placed so that it would have a time
of two years.  Its distance from the sun would be 1.6 that of the
earth.  Why?  Because to get the time doubled we would have to
take the square root of 4;  and to get the distance the cube root
of the same number, 4.  If you wish to be very exact the cube
root is 1.5889, but 1.6 is near enough for all ordinary work.

"If you wanted to find out the distance of a planet revolving in
six months you would divide the earth's distance by 1.6.

"In proportion you get any time or distance you may desire with
absolute accuracy.  The distance of any planet from the sun gives
its time, or its time gives its distance--when that of any of
the others is known.  This law applies throughout the universe;
in everything and everywhere.  It is not a law of orbital
revolution alone, but a law of all motion.

"Our moon has a time of 29 days and a speed of about 50,000 miles
per day.  If the speed were greater it would leave us, if less it
would wind up, falling to the earth in the form of a spiral.

"At what distance would it have to be to have a time of fourteen
days? Divide 240,000 miles by 1.6.  A seven-day moon, would be
1.6 that distance.  And the exact distance for a one-day moon,
for a moon that would always be in the same place in the heavens,
moving as the earth revolved on its axis, would be about 24,998
miles.

"This gives us the line of 24-hour axial rotation, the true
surface of the earth, and the sheer-line of prakritic matter.
Beyond that line is the ether;  within that line is prakriti.

"It is the line of no weight, where gravity and apergy exactly
balance.  Inside that line gravity exceeds apergy and everything
revolving in less time, or that time, must fall to the centre.
It is the true surface of any 24-hour globe of this size and
weight.  A moon to revolve around the earth in less than one day
must move faster than the earth to develop enough apergy to
overcome the attraction.  That phenomenon we see in the moons of
Mars, which are within its atmosphere;  within the planet itself.

"We of the East learned this true size of the earth over six
thousand years ago, from observing the moons of Jupiter.  The
times of the first three are doubled.  We asked ourselves what
this meant and found that their distance was increased by the
cube root of 4 when their times were increased by the square root
of 4;  that time was to distance as 1.6 was to 2.  Then we
applied the key, and found it unlocked many mysteries.

"The first lesson this taught us was that we did not live on the
earth, but within the earth, at the line of liquid and gaseous
changes, where the three forms of matter meet and mingle and
interchange with each other.  We lived at the bottom of a gaseous
ocean 21,000 miles above us, and 4,000 miles from the centre of
the globe.  It gave us an entirely new conception of the earth,
and of our place in it.

"We saw that we lived in a narrow belt, or skin, of the earth,
not more than 100 miles thick, perhaps not more than ten miles.
Within this belt the prakritic elementary substances varied their
condition, combined, and made forms by increasing or decreasing
vibration.  It was the creative and destructive zone, the
evolutionary "mother"--the liquid level of the prakriti--the
seat of all physical phenomena.  Fifty miles above, the masses of
nitrogen and oxygen and argon were too cold to change their rate
of vibration.  Fifty miles below the surface of the earth all
things were too hot for changes in vibration.  In this kinetic
belt, between two static masses our bodies had been made, and
also, in all probability, all combinations of the elementary
substances.  It was four thousand miles to the centre of the
static prakritic mass beneath us;  twenty-one thousand miles to
the surface of the static prakritic mass above us, and the small
kinetic belt between was only one hundred miles thick.  But we
had one consolation, the prakriti we had was all kinetic, and the
best in the whole mass.

"The second lesson it taught us was that as the earth had been
made in the etheric globe, in a corresponding skin or plane of
kinetic etheric energy, with our ether the best of the solar
output, that we ourselves were subject through our ether to the
phenomena of that kinetic solar plane in precisely the same way
we now are to the phenomena of the kinetic prakritic plane.  Once
rid of the fallacious notion that we were creatures of the
surface of the earth, once clearly conscious that we were
creatures of the interior, of the bottom of this gaseous ocean,
then we could understand not only how the earth could be created
in this etheric globe, but how we could be creatures of the solar
globe living on it.

"When we learned that lesson, and learned it well, it dawned upon
us that we were living in the pranic globe at the same kinetic
level or plane of that globe, the line where its solids and
liquids and gases mingled and passed from one state to another,
the kinetic belt in which our solar globe has been made, and that
we were living as truly on that globe as we were on this
prakritic globe.  Our position on each globe was the same.

"And then the great truth came that we lived in the manasic
globe, at the same kinetic level;  and that we lived our lives on
the four globes simultaneously.  Our bodies are fourfold.  Every
atom is fourfold, ready to respond in our minds to the vibrations
of the Manasic world, in our vitality to the pranic vibrations of
the pranic world, in our nerves to the etheric vibrations of the
etheric world, and in our prakriti to vibrations of the prakritic
world.  Each one of our bodies lived on its own earth globe, for
there were four globes of this earth--in coadunition--in its
corresponding kind of globe.

"The four earth globes became one globe, as our four bodies were
one body;  and the chain of four kinds of globes in matter became
one globe, as the manasic with the others on it.

"These four kinds of globes were the beginning and the end of
matter, as we distinguish and know matter.  They were not the end
of vibration;  or of planes of vibration;  or of realms beyond
this material universe;  but they were the limits of all that is
common to each and every atom of this lower plane of vibration.

"It is upon this solid and perfect foundation of physics, that
accounts for and explains every kind of phenomena, we have
constructed our metaphysics.  All that belongs to these four
lower planes we consider and treat as physics.  All that relates
to the planes beyond we consider metaphysics.  Can you teach a
child equation of payments before he knows the first four rules?
You would not attempt such a task.  The first four rules are the
physics of arithmetic;  all beyond is the metaphysics of
arithmetic.  It flows out of them.  Can you comprehend our system
of metaphysics until you have clearly and completely mastered our
physics?  Would you not get into a fog at the very start?

"There can be no system of metaphysics without a solid foundation
of physics.  The idea is unthinkable.  The one grows out of the
other.  It is its life;  its fruit, its flower.

"You have no western system of physics.  Your physics are without
form and void;  patchwork, constantly changing.  There is no
substantial foundation for any system of metaphysics.  What you
say or do in physics is fragmentary or chaotic.

"It is perfectly true, so far as you have gone through the first
invisible world of ether, you are much more masters of detail
than we are.

"We have not cared particularly for the minor details by which
explosives are made, or metals obtained from oxides.  We have
preferred to push on into realms beyond as fast as we could,
seeking first the Kingdom of Heaven and its Righteousness,
knowing that when it was found all these things would be added
unto us."




Chapter Seven

The Four Globes


That we live in the earth, not on the earth, is one of the most
important of the facts of eastern physics in the study of its
metaphysics.  The mathematical and physical proof that the
physical earth is 50,000 miles in diameter should not be
passed over lightly in our haste to get on, for the perfect
understanding of all this fact implies makes easy the
comprehension of how we live etherically in the solar etheric
globe, of how we live pranically in the stellar pranic globe, and
how we live manasically in the manasic globe.

As we live within the narrow "skin" of phenomena, not more than
100 miles thick, of this prakritic globe, with the whole earth
within the corresponding skin of phenomena of the solar etheric
globe, within the kinetic belt in which it was made, the ether
which surrounds each prakritic molecule is not merely any and
every kind of ether, but that particular kind of kinetic ether,
which, by changing its rate of vibration through an octave,
creates phenomena.  The ether of all prakritic matter belongs to
the kinetic or creative belt of the solar etheric globe.  It is
not static ether.  The ether in our prakriti is in touch with all
the prakritic kinetic ether of the solar globe, subject to all
solar laws of change;  and all our prak-solar laws of change;
and all our prakritic matter, a mere detail of it, is a part of
the solar phenomena.  "Our father, the sun," or "Dyaus pitar"
("heavenly father"--Latin, Jupiter) meant more once than it does
now.  Then the solar globe was the first heaven, and to live
under its laws, puttings off the coat of skin, was an object
which men believed to be worth striving for.  They recognized, as
we do not, that our prakritic laws were not all they had to obey;
that the higher law of the solar globe on which they lived, of
which the lower prakritic laws were merely an outcome and detail,
was worthy of the closest study.  And they recognized that these
higher laws of the etheric globe were metaphysical as well as
physical;  that our moral law flows out of the moral law of the
solar etheric world, as our physics flow from and out of solar
physics.  Religion is correct in its assumption of this higher
law of morals;  incorrect only in its grasp and explanation.
Science is correct in holding only in its assumption that it is
physical science;  incorrect only in its assumption that it is
physical science of this plane and globe only.  There is no
quarrel between science and religion when the full knowledge of
one stands beside the full knowledge of the other.  They are
twin-sisters.

This solar-etheric globe in which we are interested revolves
around Alcyone within that kinetic belt or skin of prana which is
subject to phenomena or vibration through one octave--else it
would never have been formed.  All prana in the solar-etheric
globe is of this particular kind of kinetic prana, which creates
life of all kinds--which is subject to vibration through one
octave.  The solar globe is a detail of kinetic prana only, one
of its phenomena.  Necessarily, all our prana is of this kinetic
kind, and our earth a minor detail of it in the Alcyone globe.
All the changes and combinations possible in kinetic prana on the
pranic globe are possible here, in our kinetic prana, as all the
phenomena of the etheric world are possible here in our kinetic
ether.

As our earth is a globe of ether and a globe of prana as well as
a globe of prakriti;  we are actually living on a small "cabbage"
of that pranic globe, and subject to all its laws.

In the vast manasic globe that includes this whole material
universe there is the same kinetic belt or skin of "phenomena" or
vibration similar to that kinetic belt in which we live on the
earth, and the manasa which permeates the Alcyonic globe, the
solar globe, and the earth is that kinetic manasa which is
involving and evolving.  This involving and evolving kinetic
manasa of the Alcyonic globe is that which surrounds every atom
of ether of the solar globe and every atom of prakriti of this
earth globe.  In the great manasic globe this earth of ours is a
minute village of Helios (sun) county, in the state of Alcyone.
We are actually and literally living in this manasic globe
precisely as we live in this earth, and as in the village we are
subject to all the laws of the manasic world, we can study them
here in this village as well as we could elsewhere.  We can study
them as easily as we study our prakritic village laws, or our
etheric county laws, for all the forms of manasa subject to them
anywhere are here with us.  We are not limited to a study of the
prakritic laws of the village fathers, nor yet to the etheric
laws of the supervisors of Helios county, as scientists say, nor
even to the state laws of Alcyone;  only the manasic laws of the
Universe limit our material studies in that direction.  As some
men on this earth never leave their native village and never know
or care for any matters outside of it, so in this little earth
village, in the kinetic belt of the manasic globe, there are men
who do not care to know anything which relate to matters outside
its boundaries.  As some men may pass the boundaries of their
village, but not of their county, caring only for the matters
concerning it, so the western scientists of this earth village on
the manasic globe do not pass the boundaries of Helios county,
caring only for etheric matters.  The philosophers and wise men
of the East are broader minded and from time immemorial have
taken greater interest in the pranic affairs of Alcyone and the
manasic condition of the universe in which Alcyone is a state
than in the rustic murmur of their village or the gossip of their
county.

There is nothing lacking in our manasic earth-village, nothing
that is in more abundant measure in our county, state, and
nation.  We are of the best.

We of this village may imagine, if we like, that there is nothing
beyond the village limits, and nothing in it but that which
relates to the village.  We have the right to be silly, if we
wish to be.  And it is no sign of wisdom to say that there is a
county beyond, but that the county boundaries end all, and only
village and county politics may be studied.  The European who
believed--no Asiatic or African or American could have believed
--that the earth rested on an elephant and the elephant on
a turtle was wise, in comparison.  Nor is it any sign of
intelligence to say that we may learn something of the village
and county while we live, but that to learn anything about the
state and nation we must wait until we are dead.  There are too
many in the village who are familiar with both state and nation,
and who have studied their laws, for this to be anything but
idiotic.




Chapter Eight

The Battle Ground


Each and every one of our eighty-odd elementary substances owe
their condition--whether solid, liquid, or gas--to their rate
of vibration.  We have reduced all gases to a liquid and nearly
all to a solid form.  Conversely, we have raised all solids to a
liquid and nearly all to a gaseous condition.  This has been done
by reducing or raising the vibration of each within one octave
--each one of the eighty odd having a special octave, a tone or
half-tone different from any other.  Normally, the solids,
vibrating in the lower notes, gather together under Attraction;
while the gases, vibrating in the higher notes, diffuse under
Repulsion.  Between them, created by the interchange of these two
forces, is our "skin" of phenomena, or kinetics.

Broadly, the attraction of the universe comes from its vibration
at certain centres in the three higher notes;  the repulsion
comes from its vibration everywhere else in the three higher
notes.  The central note, D of the scale, represents the battle
ground between the field of kinetics.  This in simple
illustration is water turning into gas.

This is the great battle ground, the only one worth considering
in a general view.  There are minor "critical stages" which the
chemist studies, but for us, in this broad sketch of the
universe, the important battle-ground is that between solid and
liquid on one side representing gravity, and gas on the other,
representing apergy.

All the solids and liquids of this earth of ours gather at the
centre, in a core, each of the elements (or their combinations)
in this core vibrating in their three lower notes, producing the
attraction, which is "in proportion to the mass" and which
decreases from the surface of the core "as the square of the
substance."

Around this central core gather all the elements vibrating in the
three higher notes of their octave as gases, producing repulsion
which increases by 1.6 for each doubled time.  It is worth while
making this clear.  It has never before appeared in print.

Let the amount of apergy, or repulsion, or centrifugal force at
the surface of the earth be represented by x.  This is the result
of motion at the rate of 1,000 miles per hour.  Make this motion
2,000 miles per hour, and the apergy is increased 1.6.  Four
thousand miles above the surface of this earth the rotation
is at the rate of 2,000.  It is the globe of 48,000 miles in
circumference revolving in 24 hours, and the speed is doubled.
This apergy has increased by 1.6.  As the apergy increases at
this rate every time the speed is doubled, at a distance
of 21,000 miles the speed is 7,000 miles per hour and the
centrifugal force has been increased nearly four times what it
was at the surface of the ocean.  The attraction has been
decreased to about one-thirtieth.  At the surface it is equal to
120 x.  At 4,000 miles to one-quarter, or 30 x;  at 16,000 miles
to one-sixteenth, or 7 x;  and at 21,000 miles to 4 x.

If "equatorial gravity is about 120 times that of the equatorial
apergy," at the ocean level, then at the distance of 21,000 miles
from it, in a revolving globe, the two forces would be equal;
the "pull" of each being 4 x, and an anchor will weigh no more
than a feather, for weight is the excess of gravity or apergy.

If the pyramids had been built of the heaviest known material on
the gases 21,000 miles above us, and so that they should revolve
in the same time, 7,000 miles per hour, they would remain there.
All the attraction of the solid core of the earth that could be
exerted on them at that distance would not be enough to pull them
an inch nearer to it through our gaseous envelope.  Their gaseous
foundation there would be as firm as igneous rock here.

The force of repulsion created by the three higher notes of an
octave means just as much at the attraction created by the three
lower notes, whether it is in a chemical retort, within this
earth, or within this universe.  The two forces balance, and are
exactly equal.  They fight only within kinetic zones.

Given the vast manasic globe of differentiated matter, its atoms
uniting in different numbers to form molecules as the bases of
elementary substances, manasic substances, of course.  The thrill
of vibration is sweeping through it from the spiritual plane
above, and the elements (and their combinations) which answer in
the lower notes gather and form a core, the Invisible Central
Sun, with its attraction.  The elements answering in the higher
notes gather around it with their repulsion.  So the two opposing
forces were born, with a vast kinetic skin for a battle-ground
between them.

The attraction of the invisible central sun manifests itself to
us in prakriti as Light.  The repulsion of its covering, or the
higher static vibration of manasa, manifests itself to us as
Darkness.  The first creative act in or on matter was the
creation of Light and its separation from the Darkness.  The next
creative act was the establishment of a kinetic skin or zone
between them, a firmament in which the two forces of Light and
Darkness could strive for mastery.  "And God called the firmament
Heaven."  The third creative act was the gathering of the solids
and liquids together, and the beginning of the kinetic work in
the creation of forms and shapes, by the cross play of the two
forces in their combinations of solid with gases.

All this had to happen before the manasa combined and dropped in
vibration to prana--and before the pranic globes were formed and
the Light could be manifested to us through them.  It may be well
to read the first chapter of Genesis over and ask forgiveness for
our ignorance, from the writer who records this creation of the
pranic globes as the fourth act of creation, and the creation of
the etheric sun and prakritic moon to follow that.  That record
is mutilated, fragmentary;  but the writer of it knew the facts.
If we had the full story, instead of a sentence here and there,
taken from an older story not to tell of creation but to hide
another tale for the priest, the writer of Genesis would laugh
last.

But let us return to the kinetic skin of energy between Light and
the Darkness--the firmament which God calls Heaven--the battle
ground for gravity and apergy, or attraction and repulsion, or
good and evil, or the powers of light and darkness.  This skin is
like that of an onion, thickest at the equator and thinnest at
the poles--not only on this earth but in the solar, alcyonic,
and manasic globes.  The equatorial belt, where phenomena are
richest in the manasic globes, we call the Milky Way;  in the
solar globe we call it the plane of the ecliptic;  and on the
earth, the tropics.  Modern science has not yet found it in
Alcyonic globe--because it has never thought of looking for it.

This division of the Light from the Darkness was all that was
required for evolution on the manasic globe within the kinetic
belt.  This evolution was not confined to the making of a few
alcyonic or pranic globes.  It was (and is) a great and wonderful
evolution beyond words and almost beyond imagination.  It is the
Heaven which mankind has longed to see and know.  The writer of
Genesis mixed it with the creation of this earth, using earthly
metaphors.  Before finding fault, we should better his language.
We have not the words in physics to do it, and must wait for our
metaphysics.  But of one thing we may be sure, that the pranic-
alcyonic globes here and there at the "sea level" of the manasic
globe--in what God calls Heaven--amount to no more on that
globe, or in Heaven, than so many balls of thistle-down blown
across a meadow do on this earth of ours.  Everything that can be
created in thought must be there.  It is in thought only, but in
thought it is differentiated as sharply as anything in prakriti.
The manasic world, the Heaven of the Bible, is as real as our own
world can possibly be;  in fact, more real, for when ours is
resolved back into its final elements, it will be but "the dust
of the ground" of the manasic world.

The pranic globes created in this manasic skin by Sound, or the
Logos, or vibration, evolved in identically the same way--with a
central static core and an outer static envelope, of low and high
vibration in prana, creating attraction and repulsion, or gravity
and apergy.  The kinetic skin between, in which these forces play
in the pranic world, makes a real, not an imaginary pranic world,
though but a faint reflection of the manasic.  When our father,
the Central Invisible Sun, transfers his attraction to these
alcyonic suns, the Light has something in which to manifest
itself, and we "see" this manifesting core and call it Alcyone,
and its manifestation Light;  but light in its last material
analysis is but the static mind or thought vibrating in the three
lower notes of the octave.




Chapter Nine

The Dual Man


Within the alcyonic globes of differentiated pranic-manasic atoms
the vibration divided them also into solid-liquid cores and
gaseous envelopes, and a kinetic skin of phenomena.  And then a
new world--a world of Life, came into material existence.  All
the atoms of thought or manasa, surrounding each and every pranic
atom, and making its molecule of energy, so to speak, were that
particular kind of kinetic manasa ready to change its rate of
vibration within an octave, and the forms prana assumes from the
action of thought within the kinetic belt were living and
thinking.  Each pranic globe, which was a small state of product
of the manasic, consisted of two globes in coadunition--two in
one.  Each pranic atom was the centre of a manasic molecule and
represented the universe.  All things were two in one, created by
harmonic vibration between them, and existence by the greater
strength of the lower notes, or attraction.  It was at once less
and more wonderful than the manasic world--a specialized form of
it.

When within this kinetic belt of the prana the etheric solar
globes formed here and there, they were three fold, each atom of
the new plane of matter having its surrounding envelope of prana-
manasa--a specialization of the pranic world in which (what we
call) force had been added to life and mind.  The static ether,
vibrating in each of its elements through one octave, divided
into central core (our sun, and other suns) and outer covering,
with a skin or belt of kinetic energy, "as above" which developed
an etheric world.  All things on this etheric world were caused
by the harmonic vibration between the etheric atoms and their
surrounding envelopes, except that while all things in this
etheric world must have life, not all need have mind.  The chord
of three was not necessary to create;  the chord of two was
enough, and the manasic atoms might cease to vibrate in chord
with the prana and ether without affecting the creation.  Only in
the etheric world (and below it) could there be living mindless
ones.  To the etheric globes the stellar pranic cores transferred
their light, which manifested itself in the solid static ether as
Attraction and in the gaseous static ether as Repulsion, within
the kinetic skin of each etheric world more specialized and less
varied than the pranic.

Our sun is not of prakriti, but of static ether, composed of the
separate and individual elementary substances of the ether, and
their compounds vibrating in the lower notes of their octaves.
It is our father, not our elder brother.  Its envelope of static
ether in which the planet revolves is composed of the elementary
substances and combinations vibrating in the higher notes of
their octave.  The light transferred to this etheric globe from
its mother, Alcyone, manifests itself in the lower vibration of
the sun as Attraction;  in the higher vibrations of its envelope
as Repulsion, and within the kinetic skin wherein these forces
play, the prakritic globes, planets, were born.

Take our earth.  Each atom is fourfold--whether of the static
core or of the static gaseous envelope.  Creation on it is
limited to the kinetic skin, wherein the attraction of the lower
and repulsion of the higher notes in each octave of vibration
have full play.  All things on it must have come from the
chording vibrations of the atoms of the prakritic elementary
substances and their envelope of ether.  They may or may not have
life or mind the ether atom may have lost its chord with its
pranic envelope, or the pranic envelope may have lost its chord
with the manasic;  but the combination must have force or energy
within it.  It may have lost Mind and Life in acquiring it, or
after acquiring it;  but it had to have life before it could
become prakriti.

All things in the prakritic world flow from the Life of the
etheric and the Mind of the pranic worlds.  Everything in the
etheric world has life, and our unconscious personification or
"vivification" of etheric life transferred into fauna or flora,
or into force of any kind, has a natural explanation.  The
thrill of vibration in one octave through the differentiated
consciousness of the universe by which the light was separated
from the darkness, the lower from the higher, was all that was
required to create each star and sun, and world, and all that in
them is.  And it was all good.

Each thing on every lower world was but the translation into form
of the type of the next world (or plane) above.  As each element
on this prakritic type, so each combination of those elements
into crystal or tree or animal is but the translation.  The
normal earth from the crystal to (the animal) man was pure, and
clean, and holy.  Sin had not entered.

How did it come?

On the vast manasic world there was "a special creation"--that
of the Angel Man.  The three planes of Spirit above were
undifferentiated consciousness, but they were in different
octaves of vibration, and these working on the three highest
forms of differentiated consciousness (manasic matter) brought
them to chording Vibration so that when they combined and reached
their highest point in evolution they "created" the Angel (or
manasic) man.  He was the product in kinetic manasa of the three
spiritual planes above him, precisely as the animal man was the
product in kinetic prakriti of the three material planes above
him.  The latter was the "shadow" of the other.

The Angel-man had a material (manasic) body, but his energy life,
and mind were spiritual.  The animal man had a prakritic body,
with energy, life and mind that were material.

So far all was good.

The animal man has four bodies--one of prakriti, one of ether,
one of prana, and one of manasa.  It may be true, and probably
is, that his manasic body is not sounding in chord with his
prakritic body, but only with those atoms of it which are in his
brain and nerves;  but that is immaterial--for future
consideration.

The Angel man had but one body, of manasa, in which the spirit
dwelt;  but that body was identical in substance with the body
that made the mind of the animal man.  His manasic body joined
the manasic body of the animal man, joined with it by entering
into the animal man's mind, as easily as water from one glass is
added to water in another glass, and the animal "man became a
living soul," endowed with speech, while the Angel-man was given
"a skin coat."

The prakritic body of the animal man was the result in prakriti
of an etheric-pranic-manasic, or "astral" body, formed in
accordance with the Universal Law.  For what he was by nature, he
could not be blamed.  He stood naked and not ashamed before the
Radiance.  He did not make his astral body;  he was the mere
translation of it into prakriti, as all other created things
were, and that invisible astral self (figuratively) stood at his
right hand, moulding and shaping him.

But when the Angel-man entered his mind, all this was changed.
He "knew Good from Evil."  To his mind of manasa had been added
the Spirit--the Atma-Buddhi's Consciousness of the three
Spiritual planes.  He has become "as one of us," said the Angel-
men of the firmament, of Heaven.  He now held the seven planes
and was a creator.  Each thought and desire that, when an animal
only, fell harmless, now created on the pranic and etheric world.
Soon beside him, at his left hand (figuratively) there grew up a
second etheric or astral body, that of his desires;  and his
prakritic body was no longer the product of the astral body on
his right hand.  It was the joint product of the left-hand Kamic
astral body he had created, and the right hand normal astral
body.  He was no longer in harmony with the Radiance.  He could
no longer face it.  He had created discord--Sin.

The pretty legend of the two "Angels," one on the right hand and
one on the left, has its physical basis in this truth, but, of
course, as a matter of actual fact, the normal and abnormal
astral bodies are in mechanical union.  It is the Kamic self-made
astral body that remains from one incarnation to another,
producing in joint action with a new normal astral body, a new
physical body for the Inner-Self, or Angel taking the pilgrimage
through the lower world.

All the Angel-men did not enter the animal men on the pranic
etheric-prakritic globes;  only a few.  It was a pilgrimage
through matter in which those who make it are meeting many
adventures, but the legends are many, and have no place in the
physics, although the legends are all founded on the facts of the
physics.

Of the number of monads, willing to undertake the pilgrimage,
only a few of those within the kinetic belt of the manasic globe
have reached the pranic.  Only a few of those within the pranic
kinetic belts reached the etheric.  And of all who have reached
this earth, only a few may win their way back before the great
day Be-With-Us.

The problem of man, and his relations to the universe, are an
entirely different line of study from that of the Spiritual
Monad, the over-soul of every prakritic atom.  Each prakritic
atom has what may be called a soul, its three-fold astral cause;
and an over-soul, or the three-fold spiritual archetype, or
causeless cause.

Every combination of these atoms, whether a knife, a leaf, an
animal, an earth, a sun, or a star, has this soul and oversoul.

Once the idea of what is meant by these terms becomes clear, the
difficulty in understanding them vanishes.  The study of man is
physical in its lower branches;  metaphysical only in its highest
and last analysis.  The study of the Monad is metaphysical from
start to finish.  The two studies are apt to be confused, because
metaphysically they are often joined for study, the teacher
taking it for granted that the pupil fully understands the simple
and easy physics of the problem of humanity.

This, in crude and bold outline, is the story of creation to the
fall of man according to the ancient physics, translated into the
words and phrases of modern physics.  The latter, in the latest
discoveries of modern science, seem to have stolen a shive
from the ancient loaf in the expectation that it would not be
detected.  Each and every step forward that modern science has
made in the past twenty years, each and every discovery of every
kind in the physical field, has been but the affirmative of some
ancient doctrine taught in the temples of the East before "Cain
took unto himself a wife."




Chapter Ten

The Septenary World


In the physical universe we have the four informing physical
globes, so that as a whole or in its parts, it is "a string of
seven globes," reaching from the highest spirit to the lowest
matter.  The awakened Universal Consciousness in vibration
--undifferentiated in the three globes above, differentiated in
the four globes below--in its last analysis is all one.  But there
is a gulf between matter and spirit, radically dividing them, and
in the physical universe we are concerned only with physics and
physical laws, until we reach its outmost boundaries and come in
touch with the spiritual planes beyond.

This is the view of the universe at first glance, as in the
smaller universe of this earth we at first see only its solid and
liquid globes.  And even after the discovery of the gas, we do
not apprehend its important work in and behind the others until
it has been pointed out to us.  Nor do we at first apprehend the
work of the spiritual in the material, and the object of
metaphysics is to show, through the physics, the connection
between them that the spirit works through matter;  that where we
can see but four there are seven beads on each material string;
and that the last bead of each string is itself a chain of beads,
the "chain of seven" applying only to the seventh manifestation,
or prakriti, while the "strings" apply to the way in which they
come.

On each unraveled string leading from our central sun down to a
planet there are seven beads corresponding to the seven globes in
the chain of each planet, each to each, yet not the same.  There
is a distinction, and it is no wonder there should have been
confusion at first and a mixing of "strings" with "chains."  The
physics as they progress will clear this confusion away.

In the manasic globe, which is the first differentiation of that
which forms the spiritual globes above, the resulting mind or
manasa is mainly the differentiated Divine Mind of the highest.
It has a "chain" of two globes only, itself and the Divine Mind
globe, although its "string" of globes is four.

It is the perfected differentiation of the Buddhi in manasa
that causes the formation of the pranic globes, which have
chains of four and strings of five, and the full and perfect
differentiation of the Atma in manasa-prana that causes the
formation of the etheric globes, which have chains of six and
strings of six.  Consciousness, Buddhi and Atma are practically
the same as the manasa, prana, and ether, each to each, only the
latter are differentiated and the former are not.

Each of the three astral globes is the reflection in matter of
the three spiritual globes beyond, each to each, and all to all.

The difference between matter and spirit is a difference in
Motion only.  Both are vibrating, so that both are in mechanical
motion, from force without, like the waves of the ocean, but only
the matter has what we may properly call motion of its own, or
that produced from within--from the atom and each organism of it
up to the ALL, as the vibration is from the ALL down to the atom.
It is this centre of force in an atom, this motion outside of
vibration, or rather beside it, which we call "differentiation."
Brinton's "daring psychological speculation" that "mind was
coextensive with motion" (from organization) was but a repetition
of one of the most ancient axioms.

Take our solar etheric globe.  It has two other globes of matter,
consubstantial;  a globe of prana and a globe of manasa.  They
are not beyond it, or beside it, but one with it, atom for atom.
But what are they in reality?  Globes of Atma, Buddhi, and
Consciousness in which the atoms, having organized, are in
motion, are they not?

Let this motion in this material universe cease, and matter would
melt away and resolve into spirit.  From spirit it came, to
spirit it belongs, and to spirit it returns.

Behind each and every astral globe, whether the globe be but an
astral atom, or an astral planet, or an astral world;  beyond its
physics there is a meta-physical globe, its cause, and that
is the real globe, of which the astral is but a temporary
phenomenon.  Take a spiritual globe and differentiate it.  The
Motion resulting produces a material astral globe.  Stop the
motion;  bring it to a state of rest.  The astral shadow
disappears.  It was merely spiritual phenomena.

Each and every astral atom is a model in miniature of the
material and spiritual universe.  Each and every prakritic atom
is the joint result of spirit and matter united and working
together--of physics and metaphysics;  and in its last analysis
pure spirit;  pure metaphysics.

Behind each and every prakritic atom of our earth there are six
other atoms (or globes), three material shadows and three
spiritual realities, so that it is a string of seven--the whole
universe in miniature--material and spiritual.  And all things
combined and formed on a prakritic base are a chain of seven
--whether a peach or a planet.

The "chain" belongs to the prakritic plane.  The lines of descent
from the Light through the star and sun to planet are "strings."
The "chains" are beads of the same size strung on a thread.  The
strings are beads of different sizes strung on a thread.  The
beads of the chain are in coadunition--in the same space, as gas
in water and the water in a sponge.

In metaphysics this earth can only be regarded as a chain of
seven globes, its three astral globes in coadunition having their
three spiritual doubles.  Of course no one of the higher globes
can be seen by the prakritic eye, but that is not to say the
astral world cannot be seen by the astral eye in sleep, or by the
person who qualifies himself for the astral world, through the
development of his astral body.  "No upper globes of any chain in
the solar system can be seen," says H.P. Blavatsky in the Secret
Doctrine (vol. I, p. 187), yet she means by astronomers, not by
sages.  And she does not mean the upper globes in the stellar
system of Alcyone and its companions.

In pure physics the earth can only be regarded as a chain of four
globes consubstantial and in coadunition--four in and three out.
This makes seven, and the metaphysician when talking physics uses
the metaphysical terms interchangeably and speaks of "the chain
of seven globes" meaning in one sentence the four material globes
making this earth;  in another meaning the line of descent or
string of beads of different sizes reaching down from the Divine
Consciousness;  and in still another the seven beads or globes of
the same size in coadunition to form this earth chain.  To the
student who is thoroughly grounded in the eastern physics this
interweaving of the physical and metaphysical presents no
difficulties;  but to the western mind just beginning the study
it is a tangle.

We can now see what is meant by illusion, or Maya, and understand
why such stress is laid upon it by every teacher.

Take the physical side first.  The motion of a top gives it bands
of color to our eyes that it does not have at rest.  They are
temporary and not permanent, a result of motion merely;  illusion
and not reality.

The motion of the material atoms of the four planes, in harmony
with their vibration, a motion the spiritual world does not have,
produces all material phenomena.  This is of course within the
kinetic belts, for above or below them there is no change, and
its phenomena are the mere change in relation of one atom to
another caused by motion.  The changes are not real.  They
disappear when the motion stops.  They have no existence in
matter above or below the belt.

All phenomena of every kind are as much an illusion as the
supposed bands of colour around the top.  The illusion is the
result of changes of relation in differentiated atoms caused by
their motion.  Without this motion the four material globes would
dissolve into the atomic dust of the manasic world, with all that
is within them.  The whole material universe is all illusion;  a
mere temporary relation of its atoms through motion, without
Reality or permanence.

What then is real?  What is not illusion?  That which is beyond
the physical, that which is its cause and root;  broadly, the
metaphysical, which is not the result of differentiated atoms
through relation.  What was real in the top is real here.  What
was illusion in the top is illusion here.

The meta-physical or spiritual (the terms are interchangeable)
does not have to pass beyond the manasic globe to get on the
solid ground of reality.  The spiritual world is here in every
physical atom and in every aggregation of them;  in every planet,
sun, and star;  for they are seven, each and every one, not four.
Behind the illusion of one atom or many, whether here or on
Alcyone, there is reality and permanency in the undifferentiated
cause, the spiritual archetype, the three higher beads on the
string which are the proper study of metaphysics.




Chapter Eleven

Stumbling Blocks in Eastern Physics


The Western student of the ancient Eastern physics soon meets
serious stumbling-blocks;  and one at the very threshold has in
the last half century turned many back.  In beginning his study
of the solar system, the pupil is told:

The first three planets--Mercury, Venus, and the moon--are dead
and disintegrating.  Evolution on them has ceased.  The proof of
this is found in the fact, that they have no axial rotation,
Mercury and Venus always presenting the same surface to their
father, the sun, and the moon the same surface to its daughter,
the earth.

This is a concrete statement of physical fact at which the
Western student protests.  If in the whole range of Western
astronomical science there is any one fact that he has accepted
as absolutely proved, it is that Mercury revolves once in 24h.,
5m., 30.5s., and Venus once in 23h., 21m., 22s.  He would as soon
credit a statement that the earth has no axial rotation as that
Mercury or Venus has none;  and if he continues his study of
Eastern physics it is with no confidence in its accuracy, and as
a matter of curiosity.

The statement that Mercury, Venus, and the moon "are dead
and disintegrating," the former two "always presenting the
same surface" to the sun, is the basis for an elaborate
superstructure, both in the physics and the metaphysics of the
East.  It is used in physics to explain how the "evolutionary
wave" came to an end at the perfection of the mineral on Mercury
with the loss of its axial rotation;  how the "wave" then passed
on to Venus with the seed of the vegetable kingdom, where the
vegetable evolution ended with the loss of axial rotation;
how from Venus it leaped to the moon, mother of animals and
controller of animal life, with the seed of animal life in the
vegetable;  and how finally it came to the earth, when the moon
ceased to revolve, bringing in the animal the seed of man.  Here
man will be evolved and perfected.  Man has not yet been "born"
on this earth, they say.  He is still in a prenatal or embryonic
condition within the animal.

The lunar Pitris, the men-seed, have a physical reason for being,
if this evolutionary theory be true;  none if it is not.  Axial
rotation is necessary in evolution, the ancient physics teaches,
which must cease with it.  The reasons for this are too lengthy
to give here.  Briefly, the rotation makes the electrical flow
and a thermopilic dynamo of each planet.

The ancient astronomical teaching is absolutely true.  There will
not be a work on astronomy published in Europe or the United
States this year, or hereafter, that will not state that "Mercury
and Venus revolve on their axes in the same time that they
revolve around the sun," which is another way of saying that
"they have no axial rotation, always presenting the same face to
the sun," and an inaccurate way of presenting the truth.  The
screw that holds the tire at the outer end of the spoke does not
revolve "once on its axis" each time the wheel revolves.  Run a
cane through an orange and swing it around; the orange has not
revolved "once on its axis."  Nor does the stone in a sling
revolve "once on its axis" for each revolution around the hand.
The motion of Mercury is identically that of the impaled orange
or the stone in the sling.  It has no axis and no axial rotation.
The modern astronomers, detected in pretenses to knowledge they
never possessed, let themselves down easy.

This "discovery," of no axial rotation by the interior planets,
made by Schiaparelli and confirmed by Flammarion in 1894, has
since been fully verified by our Western astronomers.  All the
new astronomies accept it.  But the admission of astronomical
"error," to speak politely, comes too late for the student it
turned back from his study of Eastern physics.  He cannot regain
his lost faith and lost ground.

Thirty years ago Proctor made it clear to Western students that
the orbit of the moon was a cycloidal curve (a drawn-out spring)
around the sun, the earth's orbit being coincident with its axis;
and that the moon was, astronomically and correctly, a satellite
of the sun, not a satellite of the earth.  This has been the
Eastern view and teaching from time immemorial.

The Eastern distinction between father Sun and mother Moon, and
the classification of the latter as a planet, did not disturb the
Western student.  He understood that.  It was the "absolute
accuracy" of modern astronomers in regard to the length of the
day on Mercury or Venus, which the astronomers declared had
been corrected down to the fraction of a second, that made it
impossible for him to accept the Eastern physics when the latter
squarely contradicted his own.

This was but the first of many similar stumbling-blocks in the
path of the student of Eastern physics.

     "Few were the followers, straggling far,
     That reached the lake of Vennachar;"

and when they did, this was what they had to face:

"The planets absorb and use nearly all the solar energy--all
except the very small amount the minor specks of cosmic dust may
receive.  There is not the least particle of the sun's light, or
heat, or any one of the seven conditions of the solar energy,
wasted.  Except for the planets, it is not manifested;  it is
not.  There is no light, no heat, no form of solar energy, except
on the planets as it is transferred from the laya center of each
in the sun to them.  The etheric globe is cold and dark, except
along the lines to them--the "Paths of Fohat" [solar energy].
Six laya centers are manifested in the sun;  one is laid aside,
though the wheels [planets] around the One Eye be seven. [This
alludes to the moon, whose laya center in the sun is now also
that of the earth;  but it is considered as a planet].  What each
receives, that it also gives back.  There is nothing lost."

"That settles it," says one student;  and the others agree.  Of
the hundred who started,

     "The foremost horseman rode alone,"

before the next step was won.

In the light of the tardy but perfect justification of the first
stumbling-block, this statement may be worth following out, "to
see what it means," and how "absurd" it can be.  An etheric
globe;  cold as absolute zero, dark as Erebus, with here and
there small pencils of light and heat from the sun to the planets
--just rays, and nothing more--is a very different one from the
fiery furnace at absolute zero of the modern physicist.

On a line drawn from the center of the earth to the center of the
moon there is a point where the "weights" of the two bodies are
said in our physics exactly to balance, and it lies, says our
physics, "2,900 miles from the center of the earth, and 1,100
miles from the surface."  This is the earth's "laya center" of
the Eastern physics.  It is of great importance in problems of
life;  but it may be passed over for the present.

Between the earth and the sun--precisely speaking, between this
laya center and the sun--there is a "point of balance," which
falls within the photosphere of the sun.  This point in the sun
is the earth's solar laya, the occult or hidden earth of the
metaphysics.

A diagram will make this clearer.  Draw a line from the laya
center in the sun to that in the earth.  Draw a narrow ellipse,
with this line as its major axis, and shade it.  At each end of
the axis strike the beginning of an ellipse that will be tangent.
If positive energy is along the shaded ellipse, negative energy
is in each field beyond--earth and sun.  This is a very crude
illustration of a fundamental statement elaborated to the most
minute detail in explanation of all astronomical phenomena;  but
for the moment it will do.

The point is that along this axial line connecting the
laya centers play all the seven solar forces--light, heat,
electricity, etc.--that affect the earth, and on every side of
this line is the "electric field" of these forces.  To this line
any escaping solar energy is drawn, as the electricity of the air
is drawn to a live wire or magnet.  But there is little or none
to escape.  From the laya point in the sun to the laya point in
the earth, the solar energy is transferred as sound is carried
along a beam of light (photophone), or electricity from one point
to another without a wire.

To the advanced student of electricity the ancient teaching is
easily apprehended;  to others it is difficult to make clear.
These laya centers, it says, are "the transforming points of
energy."  From the earth laya to the solar laya centre, the
energy, we may say, is positive;  beyond both the solar and the
earth laya centre, in the fields touching at them, it is negative
--or vice versa.  The line connecting the layas is the "Path of
Fohat"--the personification of solar energy.

This is a very crude and brief way of putting many pages of
teaching, but the important point is that this line between the
layas is one of solar energy, with a dynamic "field" of solar
energy, elliptical in shape, connecting with the reverse fields
at the laya points.  These "dead points" are the limits of each
electric field, which "create", we say in electrical work,
opposing fields beyond them.

Each one of these planets has its laya centre inside the sun's
photosphere.  Each planet has a line of solar energy with its
"field" of solar energy--not only a wireless telegraph, but a
wireless lighting, heating, and life-giving system.  These six
solar laya points are the six "hidden planets," the earth and
moon being one, of the ancient metaphysics.  The moon is the one
"laid aside."  In their reception of energy from the sun, it is
as if the planet were at the solar laya point, or connected with
it by a special pipe-line.  The position of these six planetary
laya points in the sun is indicated by the position of the
planets in the heavens, and they may often influence or modify
one another.  If Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn is anywhere near
conjunction with the earth, not only will a part of their
"fields" be joined, but their laya points in the sun will be
modified.

The physical basis of the old astrology was the physical
interferences of these fields of solar energy;  and what it
depended on mainly in its work was the position of the six hidden
planets, or laya centers, which was shown by the position of the
planet with reference to the earth.  That the planets themselves
affected any one or anything on this earth, no real astrologer
ever believed;  that their position in the heavens indicated
certain changes and modifications of the flow of solar energy to
the earth, they knew from their knowledge of physics.  "The
twelve houses are in the sun," says Hermes, "six in the north and
six in the south."  Connect them with the zodiac, and the
position of the planets shows the interferences of the solar
currents.

The one objection to this ancient theory is that it does not
present enough difficulties.  The present value to science of the
many theories in relation to the sun is the impossibility of
reconciling any two of them, and the fact that no two theorists
can unite to pummel a third.  This ancient theory does not call
for any great amount of heat, light, or energy in any condition
to keep the Cosmos in order--not even enough for two persons to
quarrel over.  It merely turns the sun into a large dynamo
connected with smaller dynamos, and these with one another with
return currents by which "there is nothing lost."  In its
details, it accounts for all facts--neatly, simply, and without
exclamation points.  It is so simple and homespun, so lacking in
the gaudiness that makes (for example) our light and heat less
than the billionth part wasted on space always at absolute zero,
that we may have to wait many centuries to have it "verified" and
"confirmed" by our Western Science.  That it will be "verified"
in time, even as the first stumbling-block has been removed at
the end of the nineteenth century, its students may at least
hope.

The lesson, if there is one, is that the Western student of
Eastern physics does not ride an auto along asphalted roads.
He must own himself and not be owned by another man, or even
by "Modern Science."





End of Project Gutenberg's Ancient and Modern Physics, by Thomas E. Willson



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ANCIENT AND MODERN PHYSICS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Einstein Theory of Relativity: A Concise Statement
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Einstein Theory of Relativity: A Concise Statement

Author: H. A. Lorentz

Release date: February 1, 2004 [eBook #11335]
                Most recently updated: October 28, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Jeroen Hellingman and the Distributed Proofreaders Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EINSTEIN THEORY OF RELATIVITY: A CONCISE STATEMENT ***
                   The Einstein Theory of Relativity

                          A Concise Statement

                                   by

             Prof. H.A. Lorentz of the University of Leyden





NOTE

Whether it is true or not that not more than twelve persons in all the
world are able to understand Einstein's Theory, it is nevertheless
a fact that there is a constant demand for information about this
much-debated topic of relativity. The books published on the subject
are so technical that only a person trained in pure physics and
higher mathematics is able to fully understand them. In order to
make a popular explanation of this far-reaching theory available,
the present book is published.

Professor Lorentz is credited by Einstein with sharing the development
of his theory. He is doubtless better able than any other man--except
the author himself--to explain this scientific discovery.

The publishers wish to acknowledge their indebtedness to the New
York Times, The Review of Reviews and The Athenaeum for courteous
permission to reprint articles from their pages. Professor Lorentz's
article appeared originally in The Nieuwe Rotterdamsche Courant of
November 19, 1919.



INTRODUCTION

The action of the Royal Society at its meeting in London on November
6, in recognizing Dr. Albert Einstein's "theory of relativity"
has caused a great stir in scientific circles on both sides of the
Atlantic. Dr. Einstein propounded his theory nearly fifteen years
ago. The present revival of interest in it is due to the remarkable
confirmation which it received in the report of the observations
made during the sun's eclipse of last May to determine whether rays
of light passing close to the sun are deflected from their course.

The actual deflection of the rays that was discovered by the
astronomers was precisely what had been predicted theoretically by
Einstein many years since. This striking confirmation has led certain
German scientists to assert that no scientific discovery of such
importance has been made since Newton's theory of gravitation was
promulgated. This suggestion, however, was put aside by Dr. Einstein
himself when he was interviewed by a correspondent of the New York
Times at his home in Berlin. To this correspondent he expressed the
difference between his conception and the law of gravitation in the
following terms:

"Please imagine the earth removed, and in its place suspended a box as
big as a room or a whole house, and inside a man naturally floating
in the center, there being no force whatever pulling him. Imagine,
further, this box being, by a rope or other contrivance, suddenly
jerked to one side, which is scientifically termed 'difform motion',
as opposed to 'uniform motion.' The person would then naturally reach
bottom on the opposite side. The result would consequently be the
same as if he obeyed Newton's law of gravitation, while, in fact,
there is no gravitation exerted whatever, which proves that difform
motion will in every case produce the same effects as gravitation.

"I have applied this new idea to every kind of difform motion and
have thus developed mathematical formulas which I am convinced give
more precise results than those based on Newton's theory. Newton's
formulas, however, are such close approximations that it was difficult
to find by observation any obvious disagreement with experience."

Dr. Einstein, it must be remembered, is a physicist and not an
astronomer. He developed his theory as a mathematical formula. The
confirmation of it came from the astronomers. As he himself says, the
crucial test was supplied by the last total solar eclipse. Observations
then proved that the rays of fixed stars, having to pass close to
the sun to reach the earth, were deflected the exact amount demanded
by Einstein's formulas. The deflection was also in the direction
predicted by him.

The question must have occurred to many, what has all this to do with
relativity? When this query was propounded by the Times correspondent
to Dr. Einstein he replied as follows:

"The term relativity refers to time and space. According to Galileo and
Newton, time and space were absolute entities, and the moving systems
of the universe were dependent on this absolute time and space. On
this conception was built the science of mechanics. The resulting
formulas sufficed for all motions of a slow nature; it was found,
however, that they would not conform to the rapid motions apparent
in electrodynamics.

"This led the Dutch professor, Lorentz, and myself to develop
the theory of special relativity. Briefly, it discards absolute
time and space and makes them in every instance relative to moving
systems. By this theory all phenomena in electrodynamics, as well as
mechanics, hitherto irreducible by the old formulae--and there are
multitudes--were satisfactorily explained.

"Till now it was believed that time and space existed by themselves,
even if there was nothing else--no sun, no earth, no stars--while
now we know that time and space are not the vessel for the universe,
but could not exist at all if there were no contents, namely, no sun,
earth and other celestial bodies.

"This special relativity, forming the first part of my theory,
relates to all systems moving with uniform motion; that is, moving
in a straight line with equal velocity.

"Gradually I was led to the idea, seeming a very paradox in science,
that it might apply equally to all moving systems, even of difform
motion, and thus I developed the conception of general relativity
which forms the second part of my theory."

As summarized by an American astronomer, Professor Henry Norris
Russell, of Princeton, in the Scientific American for November 29,
Einstein's contribution amounts to this:

"The central fact which has been proved--and which is of great interest
and importance--is that the natural phenomena involving gravitation
and inertia (such as the motions of the planets) and the phenomena
involving electricity and magnetism (including the motion of light)
are not independent of one another, but are intimately related, so
that both sets of phenomena should be regarded as parts of one vast
system, embracing all Nature. The relation of the two is, however, of
such a character that it is perceptible only in a very few instances,
and then only to refined observations."

Already before the war, Einstein had immense fame among physicists,
and among all who are interested in the philosophy of science,
because of his principle of relativity.

Clerk Maxwell had shown that light is electro-magnetic, and had reduced
the whole theory of electro-magnetism to a small number of equations,
which are fundamental in all subsequent work. But these equations
were entangled with the hypothesis of the ether, and with the notion
of motion relative to the ether. Since the ether was supposed to be
at rest, such motion was indistinguishable from absolute motion. The
motion of the earth relatively to the ether should have been different
at different points of its orbit, and measurable phenomena should
have resulted from this difference. But none did, and all attempts to
detect effects of motions relative to the ether failed. The theory of
relativity succeeded in accounting for this fact. But it was necessary
incidentally to throw over the one universal time, and substitute
local times attached to moving bodies and varying according to their
motion. The equations on which the theory of relativity is based are
due to Lorentz, but Einstein connected them with his general principle,
namely, that there must be nothing, in observable phenomena, which
could be attributed to absolute motion of the observer.

In orthodox Newtonian dynamics the principle of relativity had a
simpler form, which did not require the substitution of local time
for general time. But it now appeared that Newtonian dynamics is only
valid when we confine ourselves to velocities much less than that
of light. The whole Galileo-Newton system thus sank to the level
of a first approximation, becoming progressively less exact as the
velocities concerned approached that of light.

Einstein's extension of his principle so as to account for gravitation
was made during the war, and for a considerable period our astronomers
were unable to become acquainted with it, owing to the difficulty
of obtaining German printed matter. However, copies of his work
ultimately reached the outside world and enabled people to learn more
about it. Gravitation, ever since Newton, had remained isolated from
other forces in nature; various attempts had been made to account
for it, but without success. The immense unification effected by
electro-magnetism apparently left gravitation out of its scope. It
seemed that nature had presented a challenge to the physicists which
none of them were able to meet.

At this point Einstein intervened with a hypothesis which, apart
altogether from subsequent verification, deserves to rank as one
of the great monuments of human genius. After correcting Newton,
it remained to correct Euclid, and it was in terms of non-Euclidean
geometry that he stated his new theory. Non-Euclidean geometry is
a study of which the primary motive was logical and philosophical;
few of its promoters ever dreamed that it would come to be applied
in physics. Some of Euclid's axioms were felt to be not "necessary
truths," but mere empirical laws; in order to establish this view,
self-consistent geometries were constructed upon assumptions other
than those of Euclid. In these geometries the sum of the angles of
a triangle is not two right angles, and the departure from two right
angles increases as the size of the triangle increases. It is often
said that in non-Euclidean geometry space has a curvature, but this
way of stating the matter is misleading, since it seems to imply a
fourth dimension, which is not implied by these systems.

Einstein supposes that space is Euclidean where it is sufficiently
remote from matter, but that the presence of matter causes it
to become slightly non-Euclidean--the more matter there is in the
neighborhood, the more space will depart from Euclid. By the help of
this hypothesis, together with his previous theory of relativity, he
deduces gravitation--very approximately, but not exactly, according
to the Newtonian law of the inverse square. The minute differences
between the effects deduced from his theory and those deduced from
Newton are measurable in certain cases. There are, so far, three
crucial tests of the relative accuracy of the new theory and the old.

(1) The perihelion of Mercury shows a discrepancy which has long
puzzled astronomers. This discrepancy is fully accounted for by
Einstein. At the time when he published his theory, this was its only
experimental verification.

(2) Modern physicists were willing to suppose that light might be
subject to gravitation--i.e., that a ray of light passing near a
great mass like the sun might be deflected to the extent to which a
particle moving with the same velocity would be deflected according
to the orthodox theory of gravitation. But Einstein's theory required
that the light should be deflected just twice as much as this. The
matter could only be tested during an eclipse among a number of
bright stars. Fortunately a peculiarly favourable eclipse occurred
last year. The results of the observations have now been published,
and are found to verify Einstein's prediction. The verification is not,
of course, quite exact; with such delicate observations that was not to
be expected. In some cases the departure is considerable. But taking
the average of the best series of observations, the deflection at
the sun's limb is found to be 1.98'', with a probable error of about
6 per cent., whereas the deflection calculated by Einstein's theory
should be 1.75''. It will be noticed that Einstein's theory gave a
deflection twice as large as that predicted by the orthodox theory,
and that the observed deflection is slightly larger than Einstein
predicted. The discrepancy is well within what might be expected in
view of the minuteness of the measurements. It is therefore generally
acknowledged by astronomers that the outcome is a triumph for Einstein.

(3) In the excitement of this sensational verification, there has
been a tendency to overlook the third experimental test to which
Einstein's theory was to be subjected. If his theory is correct as it
stands, there ought, in a gravitational field, to be a displacement
of the lines of the spectrum towards the red. No such effect has
been discovered. Spectroscopists maintain that, so far as can be
seen at present, there is no way of accounting for this failure if
Einstein's theory in its present form is assumed. They admit that some
compensating cause may be discovered to explain the discrepancy, but
they think it far more probable that Einstein's theory requires some
essential modification. Meanwhile, a certain suspense of judgment
is called for. The new law has been so amazingly successful in two
of the three tests that there must be some thing valid about it,
even if it is not exactly right as yet.

Einstein's theory has the very highest degree of aesthetic merit:
every lover of the beautiful must wish it to be true. It gives a
vast unified survey of the operations of nature, with a technical
simplicity in the critical assumptions which makes the wealth of
deductions astonishing. It is a case of an advance arrived at by
pure theory: the whole effect of Einstein's work is to make physics
more philosophical (in a good sense), and to restore some of that
intellectual unity which belonged to the great scientific systems of
the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but which was lost through
increasing specialization and the overwhelming mass of detailed
knowledge. In some ways our age is not a good one to live in, but
for those who are interested in physics there are great compensations.





THE EINSTEIN THEORY OF RELATIVITY

A Concise Statement by Prof. H. A. Lorentz, of the University of Leyden

The total eclipse of the sun of May 29, resulted in a striking
confirmation of the new theory of the universal attractive power
of gravitation developed by Albert Einstein, and thus reinforced
the conviction that the defining of this theory is one of the most
important steps ever taken in the domain of natural science. In
response to a request by the editor, I will attempt to contribute
something to its general appreciation in the following lines.

For centuries Newton's doctrine of the attraction of gravitation has
been the most prominent example of a theory of natural science. Through
the simplicity of its basic idea, an attraction between two bodies
proportionate to their mass and also proportionate to the square
of the distance; through the completeness with which it explained
so many of the peculiarities in the movement of the bodies making
up the solar system; and, finally, through its universal validity,
even in the case of the far-distant planetary systems, it compelled
the admiration of all.

But, while the skill of the mathematicians was devoted to making
more exact calculations of the consequences to which it led, no
real progress was made in the science of gravitation. It is true
that the inquiry was transferred to the field of physics, following
Cavendish's success in demonstrating the common attraction between
bodies with which laboratory work can be done, but it always was
evident that natural philosophy had no grip on the universal power
of attraction. While in electric effects an influence exercised
by the matter placed between bodies was speedily observed--the
starting-point of a new and fertile doctrine of electricity--in
the case of gravitation not a trace of an influence exercised by
intermediate matter could ever be discovered. It was, and remained,
inaccessible and unchangeable, without any connection, apparently,
with other phenomena of natural philosophy.

Einstein has put an end to this isolation; it is now well established
that gravitation affects not only matter, but also light. Thus
strengthened in the faith that his theory already has inspired,
we may assume with him that there is not a single physical or
chemical phenomenon--which does not feel, although very probably in
an unnoticeable degree, the influence of gravitation, and that, on the
other side, the attraction exercised by a body is limited in the first
place by the quantity of matter it contains and also, to some degree,
by motion and by the physical and chemical condition in which it moves.

It is comprehensible that a person could not have arrived at such a
far-reaching change of view by continuing to follow the old beaten
paths, but only by introducing some sort of new idea. Indeed,
Einstein arrived at his theory through a train of thought of great
originality. Let me try to restate it in concise terms.



THE EARTH AS A MOVING CAR

Everyone knows that a person may be sitting in any kind of a vehicle
without noticing its progress, so long as the movement does not vary
in direction or speed; in a car of a fast express train objects fall
in just the same way as in a coach that is standing still. Only when
we look at objects outside the train, or when the air can enter the
car, do we notice indications of the motion. We may compare the earth
with such a moving vehicle, which in its course around the sun has
a remarkable speed, of which the direction and velocity during a
considerable period of time may be regarded as constant. In place
of the air now comes, so it was reasoned formerly, the ether which
fills the spaces of the universe and is the carrier of light and of
electro-magnetic phenomena; there were good reasons to assume that the
earth was entirely permeable for the ether and could travel through it
without setting it in motion. So here was a case comparable with that
of a railroad coach open on all sides. There certainly should have
been a powerful "ether wind" blowing through the earth and all our
instruments, and it was to have been expected that some signs of it
would be noticed in connection with some experiment or other. Every
attempt along that line, however, has remained fruitless; all the
phenomena examined were evidently independent of the motion of the
earth. That this is the way they do function was brought to the front
by Einstein in his first or "special" theory of relativity. For him
the ether does not function and in the sketch that he draws of natural
phenomena there is no mention of that intermediate matter.

If the spaces of the universe are filled with an ether, let us suppose
with a substance, in which, aside from eventual vibrations and other
slight movements, there is never any crowding or flowing of one part
alongside of another, then we can imagine fixed points existing in it;
for example, points in a straight line, located one meter apart, points
in a level plain, like the angles or squares on a chess board extending
out into infinity, and finally, points in space as they are obtained
by repeatedly shifting that level spot a distance of a meter in the
direction perpendicular to it. If, consequently, one of the points
is chosen as an "original point" we can, proceeding from that point,
reach any other point through three steps in the common perpendicular
directions in which the points are arranged. The figures showing how
many meters are comprized in each of the steps may serve to indicate
the place reached and to distinguish it from any other; these are, as
is said, the "co-ordinates" of these places, comparable, for example,
with the numbers on a map giving the longitude and latitude. Let
us imagine that each point has noted upon it the three numbers that
give its position, then we have something comparable with a measure
with numbered subdivisions; only we now have to do, one might say,
with a good many imaginary measures in three common perpendicular
directions. In this "system of co-ordinates" the numbers that fix
the position of one or the other of the bodies may now be read off
at any moment.

This is the means which the astronomers and their mathematical
assistants have always used in dealing with the movement of the
heavenly bodies. At a determined moment the position of each body
is fixed by its three co-ordinates. If these are given, then one
knows also the common distances, as well as the angles formed by the
connecting lines, and the movement of a planet is to be known as soon
as one knows how its co-ordinates are changing from one moment to
the other. Thus the picture that one forms of the phenomena stands
there as if it were sketched on the canvas of the motionless ether.



EINSTEIN'S DEPARTURE

Since Einstein has cut loose from the ether, he lacks this canvas, and
therewith, at the first glance, also loses the possibility of fixing
the positions of the heavenly bodies and mathematically describing
their movement--i.e., by giving comparisons that define the positions
at every moment. How Einstein has overcome this difficulty may be
somewhat elucidated through a simple illustration.

On the surface of the earth the attraction of gravitation causes
all bodies to fall along vertical lines, and, indeed, when one omits
the resistance of the air, with an equally accelerated movement; the
velocity increases in equal degrees in equal consecutive divisions of
time at a rate that in this country gives the velocity attained at
the end of a second as 981 centimeters (32.2 feet) per second. The
number 981 defines the "acceleration in the field of gravitation,"
and this field is fully characterized by that single number; with its
help we can also calculate the movement of an object hurled out in an
arbitrary direction. In order to measure the acceleration we let the
body drop alongside of a vertical measure set solidly on the ground;
on this scale we read at every moment the figure that indicates the
height, the only co-ordinate that is of importance in this rectilinear
movement. Now we ask what would we be able to see if the measure were
not bound solidly to the earth, if it, let us suppose, moved down or
up with the place where it is located and where we are ourselves. If
in this case the speed were constant, then, and this is in accord with
the special theory of relativity, there would be no motion observed at
all; we should again find an acceleration of 981 for a falling body. It
would be different if the measure moved with changeable velocity.

If it went down with a constant acceleration of 981 itself, then an
object could remain permanently at the same point on the measure,
or could move up or down itself alongside of it, with constant
speed. The relative movement of the body with regard to the measure
should be without acceleration, and if we had to judge only by what
we observed in the spot where we were and which was falling itself,
then we should get the impression that there was no gravitation at
all. If the measure goes down with an acceleration equal to a half
or a third of what it just was, then the relative motion of the body
will, of course, be accelerated, but we should find the increase
in velocity per second one-half or two-thirds of 981. If, finally,
we let the measure rise with a uniformly accelerated movement, then
we shall find a greater acceleration than 981 for the body itself.

Thus we see that we, also when the measure is not attached to the
earth, disregarding its displacement, may describe the motion of the
body in respect to the measure always in the same way--i.e., as one
uniformly accelerated, as we ascribe now and again a fixed value to
the acceleration of the sphere of gravitation, in a particular case
the value of zero.

Of course, in the case here under consideration the use of a measure
fixed immovably upon the earth should merit all recommendation. But
in the spaces of the solar system we have, now that we have abandoned
the ether, no such support. We can no longer establish a system of
co-ordinates, like the one just mentioned, in a universal intermediate
matter, and if we were to arrive in one way or another at a definite
system of lines crossing each other in three directions, then we should
be able to use just as well another similar system that in respect to
the first moves this or that way. We should also be able to remodel the
system of co-ordinates in all kinds of ways, for example by extension
or compression. That in all these cases for fixed bodies that do not
participate in the movement or the remodelling of the system other
co-ordinates will be read off again and again is clear.



NEW SYSTEM OR CO-ORDINATES

What way Einstein had to follow is now apparent. He must--this
hardly needs to be said--in calculating definite, particular cases
make use of a chosen system of co-ordinates, but as he had no means
of limiting his choice beforehand and in general, he had to reserve
full liberty of action in this respect. Therefore he made it his aim
so to arrange the theory that, no matter how the choice was made, the
phenomena of gravitation, so far as its effects and its stimulation
by the attracting bodies are concerned, may always be described in
the same way--i.e., through comparisons of the same general form,
as we again and again give certain values to the numbers that mark
the sphere of gravitation. (For the sake of simplification I here
disregard the fact that Einstein desires that also the way in which
time is measured and represented by figures shall have no influence
upon the central value of the comparisons.)

Whether this aim could be attained was a question of mathematical
inquiry. It really was attained, remarkably enough, and, we may say, to
the surprise of Einstein himself, although at the cost of considerable
simplicity in the mathematical form; it appeared necessary for the
fixation of the field of gravitation in one or the other point in
space to introduce no fewer than ten quantities in the place of the
one that occurred in the example mentioned above.

In this connection it is of importance to note that when we exclude
certain possibilities that would give rise to still greater intricacy,
the form of comparison used by Einstein to present the theory is
the only possible one; the principle of the freedom of choice in
co-ordinates was the only one by which he needed to allow himself to
be guided. Although thus there was no special effort made to reach a
connection with the theory of Newton, it was evident, fortunately,
at the end of the experiment that the connection existed. If we
avail ourselves of the simplifying circumstance that the velocities
of the heavenly bodies are slight in comparison with that of light,
then we can deduce the theory of Newton from the new theory, the
"universal" relativity theory, as it is called by Einstein. Thus
all the conclusions based upon the Newtonian theory hold good, as
must naturally be required. But now we have got further along. The
Newtonian theory can no longer be regarded as absolutely correct in all
cases; there are slight deviations from it, which, although as a rule
unnoticeable, once in a while fall within the range of observation.

Now, there was a difficulty in the movement of the planet Mercury
which could not be solved. Even after all the disturbances caused by
the attraction of other planets had been taken into account, there
remained an inexplicable phenomenon--i.e., an extremely slow turning
of the ellipsis described by Mercury on its own plane; Leverrier had
found that it amounted to forty-three seconds a century. Einstein
found that, according to his formulas, this movement must really
amount to just that much. Thus with a single blow he solved one of
the greatest puzzles of astronomy.

Still more remarkable, because it has a bearing upon a phenomenon which
formerly could not be imagined, is the confirmation of Einstein's
prediction regarding the influence of gravitation upon the course
of the rays of light. That such an influence must exist is taught
by a simple examination; we have only to turn back for a moment to
the following comparison in which we were just imagining ourselves
to make our observations. It was noted that when the compartment is
falling with the acceleration of 981 the phenomena therein will occur
just as if there were no attraction of gravitation. We can then see
an object, A, stand still somewhere in open space. A projectile,
B, can travel with constant speed along a horizontal line, without
varying from it in the slightest.

A ray of light can do the same; everybody will admit that in each case,
if there is no gravitation, light will certainly extend itself in a
rectilinear way. If we limit the light to a flicker of the slightest
duration, so that only a little bit, C, of a ray of light arises,
or if we fix our attention upon a single vibration of light, C, while
we on the other hand give to the projectile, B, a speed equal to that
of light, then we can conclude that B and C in their continued motion
can always remain next to each other. Now if we watch all this, not
from the movable compartment, but from a place on the earth, then we
shall note the usual falling movement of object A, which shows us that
we have to deal with a sphere of gravitation. The projectile B will,
in a bent path, vary more and more from a horizontal straight line,
and the light will do the same, because if we observe the movements
from another standpoint this can have no effect upon the remaining
next to each other of B and C.



DEFLECTION OF LIGHT

The bending of a ray of light thus described is much too light on the
surface of the earth to be observed. But the attraction of gravitation
exercised by the sun on its surface is, because of its great mass, more
than twenty-seven times stronger, and a ray of light that goes close by
the superficies of the sun must surely be noticeably bent. The rays of
a star that are seen at a short distance from the edge of the sun will,
going along the sun, deviate so much from the original direction that
they strike the eye of an observer as if they came in a straight line
from a point somewhat further removed than the real position of the
star from the sun. It is at that point that we think we see the star;
so here is a seeming displacement from the sun, which increases in the
measure in which the star is observed closer to the sun. The Einstein
theory teaches that the displacement is in inverse proportion to the
apparent distance of the star from the centre of the sun, and that for
a star just on its edge it will amount to 1'.75 (1.75 seconds). This is
approximately the thousandth part of the apparent diameter of the sun.

Naturally, the phenomenon can only be observed when there is a total
eclipse of the sun; then one can take photographs of neighboring stars
and through comparing the plate with a picture of the same part of
the heavens taken at a time when the sun was far removed from that
point the sought-for movement to one side may become apparent.

Thus to put the Einstein theory to the test was the principal aim of
the English expeditions sent out to observe the eclipse of May 29,
one to Prince's Island, off the coast of Guinea, and the other to
Sobral, Brazil. The first-named expedition's observers were Eddington
and Cottingham, those of the second, Crommelin and Davidson. The
conditions were especially favorable, for a very large number of
bright stars were shown on the photographic plate; the observers at
Sobral being particularly lucky in having good weather.

The total eclipse lasted five minutes, during four of which it was
perfectly clear, so that good photographs could be taken. In the
report issued regarding the results the following figures, which are
the average of the measurements made from the seven plates, are given
for the displacements of seven stars:

1''.02, 0''.92, 0''.84, 0''.58, 0''.54, 0''.36, 0''.24, whereas,
according to the theory, the displacements should have amounted to:
0''.88, 0''.80, 0''.75, 0''.40, 0''.52, 0''.33, 0''.20.

If we consider that, according to the theory the displacements must
be in inverse ratio to the distance from the centre of the sun, then
we may deduce from each observed displacement how great the sideways
movement for a star at the edge of the sun should have been. As the
most probable result, therefore, the number 1''.98 was found from
all the observations together. As the last of the displacements given
above--i.e., 0''.24 is about one-eighth of this, we may say that the
influence of the attraction of the sun upon light made itself felt
upon the ray at a distance eight times removed from its centre.

The displacements calculated according to the theory are, just because
of the way in which they are calculated, in inverse proportion to the
distance to the centre. Now that the observed deviations also accord
with the same rule, it follows that they are surely proportionate
with the calculated displacements. The proportion of the first and
the last observed sidewise movements is 4.2, and that of the two most
extreme of the calculated numbers is 4.4.

This result is of importance, because thereby the theory is excluded,
or at least made extremely improbable, that the phenomenon of
refraction is to be ascribed to, a ring of vapor surrounding the
sun for a great distance. Indeed, such a refraction should cause a
deviation in the observed direction, and, in order to produce the
displacement of one of the stars under observation itself a slight
proximity of the vapor ring should be sufficient, but we have every
reason to expect that if it were merely a question of a mass of
gas around the sun the diminishing effect accompanying a removal
from the sun should manifest itself much faster than is really the
case. We cannot speak with perfect certainty here, as all the factors
that might be of influence upon the distribution of density in a sun
atmosphere are not well enough known, but we can surely demonstrate
that in case one of the gasses with which we are acquainted were held
in equilibrium solely by the influence of attraction of the sun the
phenomenon should become much less as soon as we got somewhat further
from the edge of the sun. If the displacement of the first star, which
amounts to 1.02-seconds were to be ascribed to such a mass of gas, then
the displacement of the second must already be entirely inappreciable.

So far as the absolute extent of the displacements is concerned, it
was found somewhat too great, as has been shown by the figures given
above; it also appears from the final result to be 1.98 for the edge
of the sun--i.e., 13 per cent, greater than the theoretical value
of 1.75. It indeed seems that the discrepancies may be ascribed to
faults in observations, which supposition is supported by the fact
that the observations at Prince's Island, which, it is true, did not
turn out quite as well as those mentioned above, gave the result,
of 1.64, somewhat lower than Einstein's figure.

(The observations made with a second instrument at Sobral gave a
result of 0.93, but the observers are of the opinion that because of
the shifting of the mirror which reflected the rays no value is to
be attached to it.)



DIFFICULTY EXAGGERATED

During a discussion of the results obtained at a joint meeting of
the Royal Society and the Royal Astronomical Society held especially
for that purpose recently in London, it was the general opinion that
Einstein's prediction might be regarded as justified, and warm tributes
to his genius were made on all sides. Nevertheless, I cannot refrain,
while I am mentioning it, from expressing my surprise that, according
to the report in The Times there should be so much complaint about
the difficulty of understanding the new theory. It is evident that
Einstein's little book "About the Special and the General Theory of
Relativity in Plain Terms," did not find its way into England during
wartime. Any one reading it will, in my opinion, come to the conclusion
that the basic ideas of the theory are really clear and simple; it is
only to be regretted that it was impossible to avoid clothing them in
pretty involved mathematical terms, but we must not worry about that.

I allow myself to add that, as we follow Einstein, we may retain
much of what has been formerly gained. The Newtonian theory remains
in its full value as the first great step, without which one cannot
imagine the development of astronomy and without which the second
step, that has now been made, would hardly have been possible. It
remains, moreover, as the first, and in most cases, sufficient,
approximation. It is true that, according to Einstein's theory,
because it leaves us entirely free as to the way in which we wish to
represent the phenomena, we can imagine an idea of the solar system
in which the planets follow paths of peculiar form and the rays of
light shine along sharply bent lines--think of a twisted and distorted
planetarium--but in every case where we apply it to concrete questions
we shall so arrange it that the planets describe almost exact ellipses
and the rays of light almost straight lines.

It is not necessary to give up entirely even the ether. Many natural
philosophers find satisfaction in the idea of a material intermediate
substance in which the vibrations of light take place, and they
will very probably be all the more inclined to imagine such a medium
when they learn that, according to the Einstein theory, gravitation
itself does not spread instantaneously, but with a velocity that at
the first estimate may be compared with that of light. Especially in
former years were such interpretations current and repeated attempts
were made by speculations about the nature of the ether and about
the mutations and movements that might take place in it to arrive
at a clear presentation of electro-magnetic phenomena, and also of
the functioning of gravitation. In my opinion it is not impossible
that in the future this road, indeed abandoned at present, will once
more be followed with good results, if only because it can lead to the
thinking out of new experimental tests. Einstein's theory need not keep
us from so doing; only the ideas about the ether must accord with it.

Nevertheless, even without the color and clearness that the ether
theories and the other models may be able to give, and even,
we can feel it this way, just because of the soberness induced
by their absence, Einstein's work, we may now positively expect,
will remain a monument of science; his theory entirely fulfills
the first and principal demand that we may make, that of deducing
the course of phenomena from certain principles exactly and to the
smallest details. It was certainly fortunate that he himself put the
ether in the background; if he had not done so, he probably would
never have come upon the idea that has been the foundation of all
his examinations.

Thanks to his indefatigable exertions and perseverance, for he had
great difficulties to overcome in his attempts, Einstein has attained
the results, which I have tried to sketch, while still young; he is
now 45 years old. He completed his first investigations in Switzerland,
where he first was engaged in the Patent Bureau at Berne and later as a
professor at the Polytechnic in Zurich. After having been a professor
for a short time at the University of Prague, he settled in Berlin,
where the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute afforded him the opportunity to
devote himself exclusively to his scientific work. He repeatedly
visited our country and made his Netherland colleagues, among whom he
counts many good friends, partners in his studies and his results. He
attended the last meeting of the department of natural philosophy of
the Royal Academy of Sciences, and the members then had the privilege
of hearing him explain, in his own fascinating, clear and simple way,
his interpretations of the fundamental questions to which his theory
gives rise.



*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE EINSTEIN THEORY OF RELATIVITY: A CONCISE STATEMENT ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of 1001 задача для умственного счета
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: 1001 задача для умственного счета

Author: Sergei Aleksandrovich Rachinskii

Release date: August 14, 2005 [eBook #16527]
                Most recently updated: December 12, 2020

Language: Russian

Credits: -


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 1001 ЗАДАЧА ДЛЯ УМСТВЕННОГО СЧЕТА ***




-





С.А.Рачинский. 1001 задача для умственного счета

Из книги: И.И.Баврин "Сельский учитель С.А.Рачинский и его задачи для
умственного счета." М., Физматлит, 2003

Ниже приводятся задачи из задачника С. А. Рачинского «1001 задача для
умственного счета», которые могут быть использованы с учащимися на
уроках арифметики. Их изложение соответствует третьему (1899) изданию в
современном литературном и грамматическом оформлении. Устранены
замеченные опечатки, отдельные задачи подверглись редактированию.

Как и в задачнике С. А. Рачинского, словом «год» обозначается год
простой, т.е. в 365 дней, под словом «февраль» имеется ввиду этот месяц
в году не високосном. Иногда вместо слова «четверик» употребляется более
распространенное в крестьянстве в период выхода в свет задачника С. А.
Рачинского слове «мера». Предполагается, чте в стопе бумаги 480 листов.
Все задачи снабжены ответами — сразу после текста задачи.

1. В течение февраля я прочел весь Ветхий Завет. Прочитывал я по 36
страниц в день. Сколько страниц в Ветхом Завете? [1008]

2. Я купил 11 десятин земли по 23 руб. и 13 десятин по 19 руб. Сколько я
заплатил? [500 руб.]

3. Я купил 18 десятин земли по 18 руб. и 12 десятин по 23 руб. Сколько я
заплатил? [600 руб.]

4. Я купил 13 десятин земли по 39 руб. и 17 десятин по 29 руб. Сколько я
заплатил? [1000 руб.]

5. Куплено 16 десятин леса по 97 руб. и 26 десятин пахоты по 48 руб.
Сколько стоит вся земля? [2800 руб.]

6. Куплено 31 десятина леса по 32 руб. и 28 десятин по 36 руб. Сколько
стоит вся земля? [2000 руб.]

7. Я купил 37 десятин земли по 37руб. и 11 десятин по 21 руб. Сколько я
заплатил? [1600 руб.]

8. Некто был учителем в течение 14 лет. Сколько дней он учительствовал?
[5110]

9. Я купил 32 десятины земли, и каждая обошлась мне в 31 руб. 25 коп.
Сколько я заплатил? [1000 руб.]

10. Сколько вершков в 375 аршинах? [6000]

11. Я за 100 руб. купил 16 аршин бархата. Сколько стоит аршин? [6 руб.
25 коп.]

12. Я за 60 руб. купил 16 аршин сукна. Сколько стоит аршин? [3 руб. 75
коп.]

13. Купец купил за 150 руб. 120 аршин сукна. Сколько стоит аршин? [1
руб. 25 коп.]

14. Некто тратит 40 коп. в день. Сколько он тратит в год? [146 руб.]

15. На 10 руб. куплено 31 фунт пряников по 18 коп. и 34 фунта орехов.
Сколько стоит фунт орехов? [13 коп.]

16. Я купил 29 десятин пашни по 31 руб. и 9 десятин леса по 89 руб.
Сколько я заплатил? [1700 руб.]

17. Некто поехал в город и взял с собою 3 руб. Прожил он в городе неделю
и задолжал 1 коп. Сколько он тратил в день? [43 коп.]

18. Я купил 7 аршин сукна. Мне сделали скидку 1 коп., и заплатил я 10
руб. Сколько стоит аршин? [1 руб. 43 коп.]

19. Я на 20 руб. купил 32 аршина плиса по 48 коп. и 16 аршин ситца.
Сколько стоит аршин ситца? [29 коп.]

20. Я за 5 руб. купил 12 аршин ситца по 19 коп. и 16 фунтов сахару.
Сколько стоит фунт сахару? [17 коп.]

21. Я трачу по 60 коп. в день. Сколько я трачу в год? [219 руб.]

22. Некто за 900 руб. купил 19 десятин пахоты по 19 руб. и 7 десятин
леса. Что стоила десятина леса? [77 руб.]

23. На 9 руб. куплено 21 фунт пряников по 21 коп. и 17 фунтов конфет.
Сколько стоит фунт конфет? [27 коп.]

24. Я за 20 руб. купил 63 фунта пряников по 27 коп. и 23 фунта орехов.
Сколько стоит фунт орехов? [13 коп.]

25. Сколько минут в сутках, в неделе? [1440; 10080]

26. Сколько в пуде лотов? Сколько в нем золотников? [1280; 3840]

27. Сколько вершков в версте? Сколько в ней дюймов? [24000; 42000]

28. Я купил 19 десятин пахоты по 24 руб. и 17 десятин леса. За все я
заплатил 1000 руб. Сколько стоит десятина леса? [32 руб.]

29. Сколько в одном году (не високосном) часов? [8760]

30. У меня было 15 руб. Хотел я купить на эти деньги 79 аршин ситца, но
одной копейки не хватило. Сколько стоит аршин? [19 коп.]

31. Купил я 69 аршин плиса. У меня было 20 руб., и на уплату не хватило
1 коп. Сколько стоил аршин плиса? [29 коп.]

32. 2 сажени 2 аршина 2 вершка. — Сколько вершков? [130]

33. Я в течение декабря выкурил 961 папиросу. По сколько папирос
выкуривал я в день? [31]

34. Некто выпивает в каждый будний день по рюмке водки, а по
воскресеньям выпивает б рюмок. Рюмка стоит 4 коп. Сколько он пропивает в
год? [25 руб.]

35. 7 четвертей 7 четвериков 7 гарнцев. — Сколько гарнцев? [511]

36. 9 четвертей 9 четвериков 9 гарнцев. — Сколько гарнцев? [657]

37. Из трех стоп бумаги (в стопе 480 листов) сделано 36 равных книг.
Сколько листов в каждой? [40]

38. Я прожил в городе одну неделю и истратил на харчи 17 руб. 1 коп.
Сколько тратил я в день? [2 руб. 43 коп.]

39. Из 1 стопы 1 дести (24 листа) бумаги сделаны тетради по 7 листов.
Сколько тетрадей? [72]

40. У меня было бумаги 1 стопа 2 дести 1 лист. Из этой бумаги я сделал
23 тетради. Сколько в каждой листов? [23]

41. Я купил 12 аршин шерстяной материи по 37 коп. и 19 аршин холста по
24 коп. Сколько я заплатил? [9 руб.]

42. Я купил 18 аршин ситца по 18 коп. и 26 аршин полотна по 26 коп.
Сколько я заплатил? [10 руб.]

43. Я купил 27 аршин плиса по 37 коп. и 77 аршин ситца по 13 коп.
Сколько я заплатил? [20 руб.]

44. Я купил 13 аршин плиса по 39 коп. и 29 аршин ситца по 17 коп.
Сколько я заплатил? [10 руб.]

45. Я купил 79 аршин ситца по 19 коп., и мне уступили копейку. Сколько я
заплатил? [15 руб.]

46. Я за 1000 руб. купил 16 десятин пашни по 13 руб. и 7 десятин леса.
Сколько стоит десятина леса? [72 руб.]

47. Я за 15 руб. купил 34 молитвенника по 25 коп. и 13 Псалтирей.
Сколько стоит Псалтирь? [50 коп.]

48. Богомольцу нужно пройти 500 верст в 20 дней. В первые 12 дней он
проходил по 23 версты. По сколько должен он проходить в каждый из
остальных дней? [По 28 верст]

49. Я за 800 руб. купил 20 десятин пашни и 4 десятины леса. Десятина
леса втрое дороже десятины пашни. Сколько стоит десятина того и другого?
[25 руб.; 75 руб.]

50. Я за 12 руб. купил 8 фунтов кофе и 4 фунта чаю. Чай втрое дороже,
чем кофе. Сколько стоит фунт того и другого? [60 коп.; 1 руб. 80 коп.]

51. Я купил 100 грифелей по 6 коп. дюжина и 200 перьев по 3 коп. дюжина.
Сколько я заплатил? [1 руб.]

52. Куплено 20 фунтов сахара, 5 фунтов кофе и 5 фунтов чаю, и за все
заплачено 18 руб. Фунт кофе вчетверо дороже фунта сахара; фунт чая
вчетверо дороже фунта кофе. Сколько стоит фунт каждого? [15 коп.; 60
коп.; 2 руб. 40 коп.]

53. Чиновник получает 500 руб. в год. В первые 7 месяцев года он тратил
по 45 руб. Сколько может он, не делая долгов, тратить в каждый из
остальных месяцев? [37 руб.]

54. Я купил 37 коров за 1000 руб. Из них 30 я купил по 24 руб. Почем я
купил остальных? [По 40 руб.]

55. Я продал 84 четверти овса по 4 руб. и 52 четверти ржи по 7 руб. На
все вырученные деньги я купил 25 десятин земли. Почем десятина? [28
руб.]

56. Я купил 47 аршин ситца и дал 8 руб. Сдачи я получил 1 копейку. Почем
аршин? [17 коп.]

57. Я послал в город 28 подвод с рожью, на каждой подводе по 20 пудов.
Куль ржи весит 8 пудов и стоит 7 руб. За сколько я продал всю рожь? [490
руб.]

58. Железная цепь, длиною в 20 аршин, стоит 7 руб. Сколько стоит такая
же цепь, длиною в 20 футов? [3 руб.]

59. Железный брусок длиною в 5 аршин стоит 1 руб. 40 коп. Сколько будет
стоить такой же брусок длиною в 8 футов? [96 коп.]

60. Купец меняет сукно на бархат. За каждый вершок сукна дают по дюйму
бархата. Сколько аршин бархата дадут ему за 7 аршин сукна? [4 аршина]

61. Учитель дает уроки в двух домах. В одном ему платят по 12 руб. в
месяц, в другом по 3 руб. в неделю. Сколько может он тратить в месяц?
[25 руб.]

62. Я нанял повара, с тем чтобы в первый месяц заплатить ему рубль и
каждый месяц прибавлять к его жалованию по рублю. Кроме того, я давал
ему по рублю на чай в каждый из двунадесятых праздников, а на пасху
подарил ему 10 руб. Сколько получил он в год? [100 руб.]

63. Некто в течение 10 лет откладывал по 7 руб. в месяц и на эти деньги
купил 24 десятины земли. Сколько стоит десятина? [35 руб.]

64. В нашем обществе трезвости 980 членов. Если считать, что каждый из
них тем, что не пьет водки, сберегает по 25 руб. в год, сколько в год
сберегают они вместе? [24500 руб.]

65. Чиновник получает в месяц 100 руб., но тратит из них только 65 руб.
Через какое время у него накопится достаточно денег, чтобы купить землю
в 50 десятин по 28 руб. десятина? [Через 3 года 4 месяца]

66. Барышник покупал четверть ржи по 5 руб., продавал гарнец по 10 коп.
Сколько нажито на 25 четвертях? [35 руб.]

67. Купец покупал пуд сахару по 6 руб., а продавал фунт по 17 коп. В
один месяц он на сахаре получил прибыли 20 руб. Сколько пудов сахару он
купил и продал? [25]

68. Разносчик покупает дюжину платков по 5 руб., а продает платок по 50
коп. Сколько возьмет он прибыли на 30 платках? [2 руб. 50 коп.]

69. Лавочник покупает стопу бумаги по 2 руб. 50 коп. и продает десть по
15 коп. Купил и продал он 45 стоп. Сколько барыша? [22 руб. 50 коп.]

70. Лавочник покупает стопу бумаги по 4 руб., а продает лист по копейке.
Сколько стоп бумаги должен он купить и продать, чтобы нажить 100 руб.?
[125]

71. Лавочник купил пуд пряников за 4 руб. В фунте пряников 14, и он
продает их по копейке. Но он дал двум сыновьям по 18 пряников, а 24
пряника у него съели мыши. Сколько он получит барыша с этого пуда
пряников? [1 руб.]

72. Торговец каждый месяц продает по фунтам 5 пудов сахару. За пуд он
платит 5 руб., а продает фунт по 15 коп. Сколько он получает барыша на
сахаре в год? [60 руб.]

73. Торговец покупает фунт чаю по 1 руб. 60 коп., а продает лот по 6
коп. Сколько барыша он получит на пуде? [12 руб. 80 коп.]

74. Куплено 18 дюжин стульев по 30 руб. дюжина. За провоз заплачено 8
руб. Затем каждый стул продан по 3 руб. Сколько барыша? [100 руб.]

75. Купец на 80 аршин сукна по 5 руб. выменял 50 аршин бархата и
продавал бархат по 7 руб. 50 коп. аршин. Сколько барыша? [25 руб.
убытка]

76. Купец скупал рожь по 8 коп. гарнец и посылал ее в город. Он платил
за провоз по 28 коп. с четверти и продавал ее по 5 руб. 40 коп. Сколько
барыша взял он на 100 четвертях? [Ни барыша, ни убытка]

77. Гросс (12 дюжин) стальных перьев стоит 60 коп. Лавочник купил 5
гроссов и продавал десяток перьев по 5 коп. Сколько барыша? [60 коп.]

78. Гросс ручек для перьев стоит 3 руб. Лавочник купил 25 гроссов и
продавал десяток ручек по 25 коп. Сколько барыша? [15 руб.]

79. У медника было 8 кусков меди, весом каждый в 1 фунт 8 лотов. Из этой
меди он сделал чайники, весом каждый 1 фунт 21 лот 1 золотник. Сколько
чайников? [6]

80. Помещик купил 240 десятин земли по 25 руб. Но 40 десятин у него
отняли. Остальные он продал по 30 руб. Сколько прибыли? [Никакой]

81. Подрядчик взялся починить дорогу в 24 версты по 75 руб. с версты.
Нанял он 40 работников по 60 коп. в день, и они починили дорогу в 70
дней. Сколько прибыли получил подрядчик? [120 руб.]

82. Виноторговец купил бочку с вином в 372 бутылки за 225 руб. Но при
разливе 12 бутылок пролили. Почем он должен продавать остальные бутылки,
чтобы получить 27 руб. барыша? [По 70 коп.]

83. Лавочник каждый месяц покупает товара на 75 руб., а каждую неделю
продает его на 20 руб. Сколько он получает барыша в год? [140 руб.]

84. Лавочник каждый год покупает товару на 1100 руб., а каждый день
продает на 4 руб. Сколько барыша получает он в месяц? [30 руб.]

85. Два купца купили пшеницы по 7 руб. 68 коп. четверть. Один продавал
меру по 1 руб. 20 коп., другой — гарнец по 15 коп. Который из них
получил больше барыша? [Равный]

86. Холст длиною в 77 аршин по 13 коп. разрезан на 27 полотенец, и
полотенца проданы по 37 коп. Сколько барыша? [2 коп. убытка]

87. Куплено 80 аршин лент по 25 коп. и разрезано на 29 поясков, которые
проданы по 69 коп. Сколько барыша? [1 коп.]

88. Купец купил пуд кофе за 24 руб. и продавал фунт по 50 коп.; а также
пуд чаю за 80 руб. и продавал фунт по 2 руб. 10 коп. Сколько барыша?
[Никакого]

89. Купец купил кусок сукна в 75 аршин за 200 руб. и каждый аршин
продавал по 3 руб. Еще купил он кусок бархата в 40 аршин за 250 руб. и
каждый аршин продавал по б руб. Сколько барыша? [15 руб.]

90. Купец купил 9 четвертей ржи по б руб. и продавал меру по 1 руб. Еще
купил он 20 четвертей овса по 4 руб. и продавал меру по 30 коп. Сколько
барыша? [14 руб. убытка]

91. Я разделил 18 яблок между мальчиками, и каждому досталось 2&#188;
яблока. Сколько было мальчиков? [8]

92. В коробке 80 спичек, и стоит она копейку. Сколько стоят 2000 спичек?
[25 коп.]

93. В лавке несколько платков. Если они будут проданы по б руб., то
лавочник получит 24 руб. барыша. Если же они будут проданы по 3 руб., он
будет в убытке на 12 руб. Сколько платков у лавочника, и почем он их
покупал? [12 платков; по 4 руб.]

94. Бабе заказано выткать несколько аршин холста. Если она будет
работать 7 дней, она 8 аршин не доткет; если же она будет работать 9
дней, то выткет 4 аршина лишних. Сколько аршин ей заказано, и сколько
аршин ткет она в день? [50; 6]

95. Между двумя городами 600 верст. Двое вышли из них одновременно друг
другу навстречу и встретились через 15 дней в 240 верстах от одного из
городов. Сколько верст в день проходил каждый? [16; 24]

96. Два брата зарабатывают вместе в год 320 руб. Но один зарабатывает в
месяц столько, сколько другой в неделю. Сколько каждый зарабатывает в
год? [60 руб.; 260 руб.]

97. Отец хотел бы оставить каждому из своих сыновей по 25 десятин, но у
него 5 десятин не хватает. Поэтому он отдает каждому из сыновей по 20
десятин и столько же оставляет жене. Сколько у него сыновей и сколько
десятин земли? [5 сыновей; 120 десятин]

98. Я закупил в городе несколько фунтов чаю. Если я продам их по 2 руб.
40 коп., у меня будет 6 руб. барыша. Если же я продам их по 1 руб. 80
коп., то будет 3 руб. убытка. Сколько я купил фунтов чаю и почем? [15
фунтов по 2 руб.]

99. Я принес в школу 220 орехов и раздал по 4 ореха каждому мальчику, по
3 — каждой девочке. В школе вдвое больше мальчиков, чем девочек. Сколько
тех и других? [40; 20]

100. Я купил сукна по 7 руб. и бархата по 9 руб. аршин, сукна втрое
больше, чем бархата; всего на 150 руб. Сколько купил я аршин сукна и
сколько бархата? [15; 5]

101. За 1 руб. 33 коп. я купил молитвенник, Часослов и 1 Псалтирь.
Каждая книга вдвое дороже предыдущей. Цены? I [19 коп.; 38 коп.; 76
коп.]

102. За 2 руб. 21 коп. я купил кушак, картуз и шапку. Каждая вещь втрое
дороже предыдущей. Цены? [17 коп.; 51 коп.; 1 руб. 53 коп.]

103. За 189 руб. я купил овцу, корову и лошадь. Каждая скотина вчетверо
дороже предыдущей. Цены? [9 руб.; 36 руб.; 144 руб.]

104. За 248 руб. я купил золотое кольцо, золотую цепочку и золотые часы.
Каждая вещь впятеро дороже предыдущей. Цены? [8 руб.; 40 руб.; 200 руб.]

105. За 430 руб. я купил седло, сани и карету. Каждая вещь вшестеро
дороже предыдущей. Цены? [10 руб.; 60 руб.; 360 руб.]

106. Из пуда меди медник сделал подсвечник, чайник, кастрюлю и самовар.
Каждая вещь втрое тяжелее предыдущей. Вес? [1 фунт; 3 фунта; 9 фунтов;
27 фунтов]

107. За 400 руб. я купил кушак, шапку, шубу и тройку лошадей. Каждая
покупка стоила всемеро больше денег, чем предыдущая. Цены? [1 руб.; 7
руб.; 49 руб.; 343 руб.]

108. Я за 200 руб. купил собаку, корову и лошадь. Корова втрое дороже
собаки, лошадь вчетверо дороже собаки вместе с коровою. Цены? [10 руб.;
30 р.; 160 руб.]

109. Я за 200 руб. купил собаку, 2 коровы и лошадь. Каждая корова
вчетверо дороже собаки; лошадь вчетверо дороже коровы. Цены? [8 руб.; 32
руб.; 128 руб.]

110. Два брата купили по одной цене — один 16, другой 20 десятин земли.
Второй заплатил на 100 руб. больше. Сколько заплатил каждый? [400 руб.;
500 руб.]

111. Два куска одинакового ситца, один в 24 аршин, другой в 30 проданы
вместе за 8 руб. 10 коп. Сколько стоит каждый? [3 руб. 60 коп.; 4 руб.
50 коп.]

112. Два брата купили вместе 50 четвертей овса. Но один купил четырьмя
четвертями больше другого; вместе они заплатили 300 руб. Сколько
заплатил каждый? [162 руб.; 138 руб.]

113. Рассыльный при волости каждую неделю ходит в город, за 65 верст.
Сколько верст он проходит в год? [6760]

114. Я купил 26 аршин плиса по 48 коп. и 313 пряников и за все заплатил
25 руб. Сколько стоил каждый пряник? [4 коп.]

115. Я разделил между своими детьми 10 руб., и каждому досталось по
полтиннику, четвертаку (25 коп.), двугривенному (20 коп.),
пятиалтынному(15 коп.), гривеннику и пятачку. Сколько у меня детей? [8]

116. 1000 вершков — сколько саженей, аршин и вершков? [20 саженей 2
аршина 8 вершков]

117. Я в 39 минут проехал 6 верст 3 сажени. Сколько проезжал я в минуту?
[77 саженей]

118. Я был в дороге 8 часов и прошел 38 верст. Сколько проходил я в час?
[4 версты 375 саженей]

119. Сколько нужно аршин сукна на 72 пары штанов, если на каждую пару
идет 1 аршин 12 вершков? [126 аршин]

120. Портной из 10 аршин 8 вершков сукна сшил несколько пар штанов. На
каждую пару пошло 1 аршин 5 вершков. Сколько пар? [8]

121. Лист бумаги весит 1 золотник. Что будут весить 8 стоп? [1 пуд]

122. 38 мальчикам роздано бумаги 3 стопы 4 листа. Сколько листов
досталось каждому? [38]

123. Тесемка длиною в 45 футов стоит 1 руб. 35 коп. Сколько стоит аршин
этой тесемки? [7 коп.]

124. Лавочник купил 25 стоп бумаги по 2 руб. 40 коп. и распродал их по
15 коп. за десть. Сколько получил он барыша? [15 руб.]

125. От дворца до собора 36 саженей. Для царского выхода на этом
протяжении постланы ковры длиною каждый в 1 сажень 3 фута 6 дюймов.
Сколько ковров? [24]

126. Из пуда меди сделано 96 равных колокольчиков. Сколько веса в
каждом? [13 лот 1 золотник]

127. Из 5 фунтов серебра сделаны цепочки, весом каждая в 7 золотников 48
долей. Сколько цепочек? [64]

128. Купец за 22 руб. 50 коп. купил 125 аршин ситца и продавал аршин по
26 коп. Сколько он получил барыша? [10 руб.]

129. Машина на фабрике каждую минуту делает 50 стальных перьев. Сколько
гроссов в сутки? [500]

130. Из 5 фунтов серебра сделаны кольца, весом каждое в 2 золотника 48
долей. Сколько? [192]

131. Я даю лошади по 1 гарнцу овса в день. Сколько овса съест она в год?
[5 четвертей 5 мер 5 гарнцев]

132. Улитка проползает 25 саженей в 1 час 12 мин. За какое время
проползет она версту? [За сутки]

133. Я купил за 20 руб. 37 аршин ситца по 24 коп. и 8 аршин сукна.
Сколько стоит аршин сукна? [1 руб. 39 коп.]

134. Лавочник купил 7 фунтов чаю по 2 руб., а распродал их по 7 коп. за
лот. Сколько получил он барыша? [1 руб. 68 коп.]

135. Из 6 фунтов серебра сделаны лампадки весом каждая в 10 лотов 2
золотника. Сколько вышло лампадок? [18]

136. Медник из 1 пуда меди сделал 32 равных чайника. Сколько весит
каждый? [1 фунт 8 лотов]

137. Машина за 16 минут изготовляет аршин сукна. Сколько аршин изготовит
она в сутки? [90]

138. Из пуда меди сделано 30 равных чайников. Сколько весит каждый? [1
фунт 10 лотов 2 золотника]

139. Машина изготовляет по листу бумаги в минуту. Сколько стоп она
изготовит в неделю? [21]

140. Машина в 24 часа выткала 9 равных кусков сукна. За какое количество
времени может она выткать один кусок? [2 час. 40 мин.]

141. У разносчика спросили, сколько у него яблок. Он отвечал: если к
моим яблокам прибавить половину их числа, да еще 10, будет 100. Сколько
у него яблок? [60]

142. У меня было бумаги 2 стопы 3 дести 8 листов. Я роздал эту бумагу
ученикам, каждому по 1 дести 2 листа. Сколько у меня учеников? [40]

143. У меня была веревка, длиною в 16 саженей 2 аршина. Я отрезал от нее
3 куска, каждый в 3 сажени 2 аршина. Сколько веревки у меня осталось? [5
саженей 2 аршина]

144. У меня в лампадке сгорает по 1 золотнику масла в день. Сколько
сгорит за 2 года 38 дней? [8 фунтов]

145. За какое количество времени можно проехать 10 верст 400 саженей,
если каждую минуту проезжать по 45 саженей? [За 2 часа]

146. Я купил 15 равных голов сахару, и их хватило мне на 3 простых года.
На сколько дней хватало одной головы? [73]

147. Сколько булок можно испечь из 1 пуда муки, если на каждую булку
идет муки 1 фунт 10 лотов 2 золотника? [30]

148. У меня было 7 подсвечников весом каждый в 1 фунт 1 лот 1 золотник.
Сколько золотников во всех подсвечниках? [700]

149. За 10 руб. куплено 26 аршин ситца по 19 коп. и 22 аршина холста.
Сколько стоит аршин холста? [23 коп.]

150. Поденщик тратит на себя 20 коп. в день, а за каждый рабочий день
получает 50 коп. К концу года у него накопилось 71 руб. Сколько дней он
работал? [288]

151. Живописец за 2 часа 5 минут написал масляный портрет и получил за
него 30 руб. Сколько он зарабатывал в минуту? [24 коп.]

152. Двое одновременно вышли друг другу навстречу из двух городов,
отстоящих один от другого на 63 версты. Один проходит версту за 15 мин.,
другой за 12 мин. Когда они встретятся? [Через 7 часов]

153. На жилетку идет 1 аршин 5 вершков материи. Сколько жилеток выйдет
из 21 аршина такой материи? [16]

154. Я купил 27 десятин пашни по 37 руб. и 13 десятин леса. За все я
заплатил 2000 руб. Сколько стоит десятина леса? [77руб.]

155. Поезд проезжает версту в 2 минуты. Сколько может он проехать в
сутки? [720 верст]

156. Поезд проезжает версту за 1 минуту 30 секунд. За какое время может
он проехать 1000 верст? [25 часов]

157. Торговка купила 600 яблок по 7 коп. за дюжину, а продала все яблоки
по копейке. Сколько получила она барыша? [2 руб. 50 коп.]

158. У портного было 60 аршин сукна. Из них он сшил 16 сюртуков, и на
каждый пошло по 2 аршина 4 вершка, и несколько пар брюк; на каждую пошло
по 1 аршину 8 вершков. Сколько пар? [16]

159. Из пуда серебра сделаны крестики. На каждый пошло 7 золотников 48
долей серебра. Сколько вышло крестиков? [512]

160. На фабрике машина в 18 минут изготовляет 500 стальных перьев.
Сколько изготовит она их в сутки? [40 000]

161. Из 63 аршин сукна сшиты штаны. На каждую пару пошло 1 аршин 12
вершков. Сколько сшито пар? [36]

162. Я купил за 2000 руб. 44 десятины земли; в ней было 16 десятин пашни
по 41 руб.; остальная земля — луг. Почем десятина луга? [48 руб.]

163. Сколько печеного хлеба выйдет из 1 пуда муки, если из 1 фунта муки
выходит 1 фунт 12 золотников хлеба? [1 пуд 5 фунтов]

164. На 7 учеников вышло в год бумаги 1 стопа 1 десть 21 лист. Сколько
выйдет на 20 учеников? [3 стопы 2 дести 12 листов]

165. У меня было бумаги 2 стопы 2 дести 4 листа, и я разделил ее поровну
моим ученикам. Каждому досталось по дести без 1 листа. Сколько у меня
учеников? [44]

166. Сажень телеграфной проволоки весит 24 лота. Что будет весить такая
проволока длиною в версту? [9 пудов 15 фунтов]

167. Сделано 72 кольца весом каждое в 2 лота 1 золотник и 24 цепочки
весом каждая в 6 лотов 1 золотник. Сколько пошло серебра? [10 фунтов]

168. Из 6 фунтов серебра сделаны стаканчики, каждый в 5 лотов 1
золотник. Сколько стаканчиков? [36]

169. В неугасимой лампаде в сутки сгорает 4 лота масла. Сколько в год?
[1 пуд 5 фунтов 20 лотов]

170. Из 5 фунтов серебра сделали кольца весом каждое в 1 золотник 48
долей. Сколько вышло колец? [320]

171. По железной дороге уложены рельсы длиною каждый в 2 сажени 1 аршин
8 вершков. Сколько таких рельсов уложится в 1 версту? [200]

172. На протяжении 4 саженей я уложил в ряд трехкопеечные монеты,
поперечник которых — дюйм. Сколько это денег? [10 руб. 8 коп.]

173. Я променял четверть овса на бумагу. За каждый гарнец я получил
десть. Сколько я получил листов? [1536]

174. Из 6 золотников табака выходит 15 папирос. Сколько их выйдет из
пуда табака? [9600]

175. Выехал из деревни крестьянин и едет по 6 верст в час. Через 2 часа
выезжает за ним другой и проезжает по 9 верст в час. Когда он догонит
первого? [Через 4 часа]

176. Выехал из деревни крестьянин и проезжает в час по 8 верст. Через 3
часа выезжает другой. По сколько верст должен он ехать в час, чтобы
нагнать первого через 12 часов? [По 10 верст]

177. Выехал крестьянин из деревни и проезжает в час по 4 версты. Через
несколько времени выехал другой и, проезжая в час по 6 верст, нагнал
первого через 10 часов. Спустя сколько времени после первого он выехал?
[5 часов]

178. На печение 7 хлебов пошло 2 пуда 39 фунтов муки. Сколько пойдет на
13 таких же хлебов? [5 пудов 21 фунт]

179. У медника было 4 куска меди весом каждый в 3 фунта 24 золотника. Он
из этой меди сделал кастрюли в 2 фунта 16 золотников. Сколько? [6]

180. За 3000 руб. куплено 36 десятин пахоты по 36 руб. и 24 десятины
леса. Сколько стоит десятина леса? [71 руб.]

181. Колесо, имеющее в окружности 1 сажень 1 вершок, проехало 1 версту и
10 вершков. Сколько раз оно обернулось? [490]

182. Стопа бумаги стоит 2 руб. 40 коп. Сколько дадут мне бумаги на 28
коп.? [2 дести 8 лотов]

183. 19 мальчиков читали Псалтирь по покойнику в течение 1 суток 1 часа
1 минуты. Сколько времени пришлось читать каждому? [1 час 19 минут]

184. Ткач работал б дней, по 7 часов в день. Аршин он ткет в 28 минут.
Сколько он выткал аршин? [90]

185. На 32 лошади вышло 5 четвертей овса. Сколько на каждую? [1 мера 2
гарнца]

186. За 300 руб. я купил 23 четверти ржи по 6 руб. и 18 четвертей
пшеницы. Сколько стоит четверть пшеницы? [9 руб.]

187. Я за 4 руб. купил 16 аршин ситца и 4 аршина плиса. Ситец — по 13
коп. аршин. Сколько стоит аршин плиса? [48 коп.]

188. За 4 руб. я купил 21 аршин холста по 11 коп. и 13 аршин ситца.
Сколько стоит аршин ситца? [13 коп.]

189. На лампадку выходит каждый месяц 13 лотов 1 золотник масла. Сколько
в год? [5 фунтов]

190. У 48 человек сколько зубов? [1536]

191. На сколько человек хватит в год 1 пуд 2 фунта чаю, если на каждого
выходит в месяц по 8 лотов? [14]

192. Я отправляю по почте по 80 писем (в 1 лист) в месяц. Сколько
почтовой бумаги трачу я в год? [2 стопы]

193. 5 мер 3 гарнца ржи стоят 4 руб. 30 коп. Сколько стоит четверть? [6
руб. 40 коп.]

194. Баба прошла в 7 минут 175 сажень? Сколько она пройдет в час? [3
версты]

195. Сколько кур можно прокормить в год 9 четвертями овса, если каждая
съедает в месяц по 3 гарнца? [16]

196. 32 белых хлебца весят 7 фунтов. Сколько веса в каждом? [7 лотов]

197. 7 фунтов чаю стоят 17 руб. 50 коп. Сколько стоит пуд? [100 руб.]

198. Я за 4 руб. купил 7 азбук по 24 коп. и 8 молитвенников. Сколько
стоит молитвенник? [29 коп.]

199. Я купил 2 головы сахару. Одна вдвое тяжелее и на 3 руб. дороже
другой. Сколько стоит каждая? [3 руб.; 6 руб.]

200. Я купил 5 гроссов стальных перьев и роздал их 36 ученикам. Сколько
перьев получил каждый? [20]

201. Работник получает в год 90 руб. и каждый месяц отдает отцу 2 руб.
50 коп. Сколько тратит он на себя в месяц? [5 руб.]

202. Лавочник каждый месяц продает 25 фунтов чаю. Покупает он его по 1
руб. 60 коп., продает по 2 руб. фунт. Сколько барыша в год на чай? [120
руб.]

203. У меня было 72 лошади. Каждую тройку я покупал по 100 руб., а
каждую четверку продал по 150 руб. Сколько барыша? [300 руб.]

204. Я купил за 50 руб. 14 аршин сукна двух сортов по 3 и по 4 руб.
Сколько того и другого? [6 аршин по 3 руб.; 8 аршин по 4 руб.]

205. Лавочник смешал 5 фунтов кофе по 48 коп. с 7 фунтами кофе по 60
коп. Сколько стоит фунт смеси? [55 коп.]

206. У меня было 300 яблок. Я купил их по 8 коп. десяток, а продал их по
12 коп. дюжину. Сколько барыша? [60 коп.]

207. В двух кусках одинакового ситца 50 аршин. Один на 6 аршин длиннее и
на 90 коп. дороже другого. Сколько стоит каждый? [3 руб. 30 коп.; 4 руб.
20 коп.]

208. У меня 108 руб. 3-, 5- и 10-рублевыми бумажками поровну. Сколько
бумажек каждой ценности? [6]

209. За 64 руб. я купил 12 азбук по 23 коп. и 9 Часословов. Сколько
стоит Часослов? [36 коп.]

210. За 4 руб. я купил 7 аршин шерстяной материи по 32 коп. и 11 аршин
ситца. Почем аршин ситца? [16 коп.]

211. Чиновник получает в год 1000 руб. Тратит он в месяц по 70 руб.
Через сколько лет уплатит он долг в 800 руб.? [5]

212. За 3 руб. я купил 8 молитвенников по 23 коп. и 4 азбуки. Сколько
стоит азбука? [29 коп.]

213. 5 дестей 12 листов бумаги стоят 66 коп. Сколько стоит стопа? [2
руб. 40 коп.]

214. Пуд чаю стоит 64 руб. Сколько стоит 15 фунтов? [24 руб.]

215. Золотник серебра стоит 27 коп. Сколько нужно заплатить за 3 фунта 4
лота? [81 руб]

216. Поезд может проехать в 9 часов 351 версту. Сколько верст проедет он
в 12 часов? [468]

217. Чиновник получает жалованья в год 192 руб. Сколько получит он за 2
года 6 месяцев? [480 руб.]

218. Писец в час переписывает 5 страниц. Во сколько времени перепишет он
18 страниц? [3 часа 36 минут]

219. Аршин материи стоит 64 коп. Сколько стоит 6 аршин 4 вершка? [4
руб.]

220. Пуд крупчатой муки стоит 1 руб. 60 коп. Сколько нужно заплатить за
2 пуда 25 фунтов? [4 руб. 20 коп.]

221. У купца был кусок бархата в 140 аршин. Я купил 19 аршин этого
бархата за 133 руб. Сколько стоит весь кусок? [980 руб.]

222. Два писца берутся переписать 180 листов: один в 36 дней, другой в
45. За сколько дней перепишут они их вместе? [За 20 дней]

223. Три бабы берутся выткать 240 аршин холста: одна в 24 дня, другая в
40, третья в 30. За сколько времени выткут они эти 240 аршин втроем? [10
дней]

224. Я за 5 руб. купил 7 Псалтирей и 9 молитвенников. Псалтирь стоит 47
коп. Сколько стоит молитвенник? [19 коп.]

225. За 16 руб. я купил 5 аршин сукна и 12 аршин плиса. Сукно вчетверо
дороже плиса. Цены за аршин? [2 руб.; 50 коп.]

226. Из фунта серебра сделаны крестик, лампадка и подсвечник. Лампадка
втрое тяжелее крестика. Подсвечник вчетверо тяжелее лампадки. Сколько
весит каждая вещь? [2 лота; 6 лотов; 24 лота]

227. Лавочник за 4 месяца наторговал 120 руб. Но каждый месяц он наживал
вдвое больше, чем в предыдущий. Сколько в каждый? [8; 16; 32; 64 руб.]

228. За 3 руб. 1 коп. я купил поясок, платок и шапку. Платок вшестеро
дороже пояска, шапка вшестеро дороже платка. Сколько стоит каждая вещь?
[7 коп.; 42 коп.; 2 руб. 52 коп.]

229. Нанят работник за 108 руб. в год. Через 15 месяцев его рассчитали и
дали ему 115 руб. и платье. Сколько стоит платье? [20 руб.]

230. Жена моя вяжет по 7 пар чулок в месяц, а дочь по 3 пары в неделю.
Сколько заработают они в год, если на каждой паре они выручают 25 коп.?
[60 руб.]

231. В 4 корзинках 21, 22, 23 и 24 яблока, сколько нужно прибавить к
каждой, чтобы во всех было 100 и в каждой поровну? [4; 3; 2; 1]

232. За 5 руб. я купил Псалтирь, Евангелие и карту России. Каждая вещь
вдвое дороже предыдущей. Сколько стоит каждая? [43 коп.; 86 коп.; 1 руб.
72 коп.]

233. За 4 руб. я купил карандаш, грифельную доску, Евангелие и Библию.
Каждая вещь втрое дороже предыдущей. Сколько стоит каждая? [10 коп.; 30
коп.; 90 коп.; 2 руб. 70 коп.]

234. Я купил 2 куска одинакового ситца. Один кусок втрое длиннее и на 3
руб. дороже другого. Сколько стоит каждый кусок? [1 руб. 50 коп.; 4 руб.
50 коп.]

235. На 9 мужчин и 7 детей вышло 5 пудов хлеба. Мужчина съедает вдвое
больше хлеба, чем дитя. Сколько съел хлеба каждый мужчина, сколько
каждый ребенок? [16 фунтов; 8 фунтов]

236. Разносчик продал 14 аршин ситца по 16 коп. и 12 аршин по 23 коп. и
на вырученные деньги купил 4 книги; вторая — вдвое, третья втрое,
четвертая вчетверо дороже первой. Сколько стоит каждая? [50 коп.; 1
руб.; 1 руб. 50 коп.; 2 руб.]

237. Мальчик за 5 недель до ярмарки стал откладывать деньги. В первую
неделю он отложил 4 коп., а затем каждую неделю откладывал вдвое больше,
чем в предыдущую. На отложенные деньги он купил пряник, азбуку и картуз.
Всякая вещь в 5 раз дороже предыдущей. Цены? [4 коп.; 20 коп.; 1 руб.]

238. Лавочник продал 23 аршина ситца по 11 коп. и 19 фунтов пряников по
13 коп. На вырученные деньги он купил картуз и шапку, которая втрое
дороже картуза. Сколько стоит то и другое? [1 руб. 25 коп.; 3 руб. 75
коп.]

239. У помещика было три работника, которым он жалованья не платил, но
оставил после своей смерти пустошь в 300 десятин. Один работник прожил у
него 23 года, другой 25 лет, третий — 27. Сколько десятин должен
получить каждый? [92; 100; 108]

240. Куплено 3 куска сукна, по 3 руб. аршин, всего на 483 руб. Во втором
куске вдвое больше сукна, чем в первом, в третьем вдвое больше, чем во
втором. Сколько аршин в каждом? [23; 46; 92]

241. Лавочник купил 2 гросса перьев по 70 коп. Перья он разложил в
коробки по 32 пера и коробку продавал по 32 коп. Сколько барыша? [1 руб.
48 коп.]

242. Торговец смешал 5 фунтов муки по 13 коп. с 5 фунтами муки по 7 коп.
Сколько стоит фунт смешанной муки? [10 коп.]

243. От деревни до города 63 версты. Двое одновременно вышли друг другу
навстречу из города и деревни. Один проходит в час 3 версты 125 саженей,
другой 3 версты 375 саженей. Через сколько времени они встретятся?
[Через 9 часов]

244. Куплено 2 куска одинакового ситца. В одном куске 18 аршин, в другом
24. Второй кусок дороже на 90 коп. Сколько стоит каждый кусок? [2 руб.
70 коп.; 3 руб. 60 коп.]

245. Купец купил 37 пудов сахару по б руб., да за провоз заплатил 18
руб., 1 пуд у него украли, а весь остальной сахар он продал по 7 руб.
пуд. Сколько барыша? [12 руб.]

246. Барышник купил 7 четвертей овса по 2 руб. 50 коп. и продавал гарнец
по 5 коп. Сколько получил он барыша? [4 руб. 90 коп.]

247. Торговец купил 2 головы сахару, одну в 17, другую в 19 фунтов, и за
обе заплатил 5 руб. 40 коп. Почем должен он продавать фунт этого сахара,
чтобы на нем получить 1 руб. 80 коп. барыша? [По 20 коп.]

248. Торговец смешал 7 фунтов чаю по 2 руб., 6 фунтов по 2 руб. 50 коп.
и 5 фунтов по 4 руб. Почем должен он продавать фунт смешанного чаю,
чтобы получить барыша 23 руб.? [По 4 руб.]

249. Двое одновременно выехали друг другу навстречу из Ржева и Белого
(120 верст) и встретились через 8 часов. Один проезжал в час 9 верст.
Сколько проезжал в час другой? [6 верст]

250. Мальчику подарили копилку и положили в нее копейку на счастье. В
эту копилку отец мальчика клал каждый месяц 20 коп., мать — 10 коп.,
брат — 5 коп., сестра — 2 коп. Через 2 года и 3 месяца копилку открыли.
Сколько в ней оказалось денег? [10 руб.]

251. Два купца меняются товаром. Один дает 24 фунта чаю по 2 руб. 50
коп. и 60 фунтов кофе по 60 коп. Другой дает сахар, по 6 руб. пуд.
Сколько пудов? [16]

252. Портной купил 144 аршина сукна по 2 руб. и сшил из него 24 пары
платья. Приклад на каждую пару стоил ему 3 руб., и каждую пару он
продавал по 20 руб. Сколько барыша? [120 руб.]

253. Лавочник каждый месяц продавал по 15 фунта чаю. Покупал он его по 1
руб. 75 коп., а продавал по 2 руб. По истечении года он на барыши купил
ржи, по 7 руб. 50 коп. четверть. Сколько четвертей? [6]

254. Сколько ударов в сутки бьют часы, бьющие половины (одним ударом)?
[180]

255. Сколько ударов в сутки бьют часы, бьющие четверти (1, 2, 3, 4
удара)? [396]

256. В двух ящиках 30 и 60 фунтов чаю. Сколько нужно прибавить к
каждому, чтобы в обоих вместе было 111 фунтов и во втором вдвое больше,
чем в первом? [7; 14]

257. Я купил стопу бумаги, платя за каждые 5 листов по 3 коп. Из этой
бумаги я сделал 32 тетради. Обертка каждой тетради стоит 1 коп. Во что
обошлась мне тетрадь? [10 коп.]

258. Лавочник покупает пуд пряников по 2 руб. 40 коп., а продает фунт по
8 коп. Сколько пудов должен он купить и продать, чтобы на барыши купить
корову, которая стоит 20 руб.? [25 пудов]

259. Двое одновременно вышли друг другу навстречу из двух деревень. Шаг
их — аршин. Один делает в минуту 133 шага, другой — 167. Встретились они
через 5 минут. Расстояние между деревнями? [1 верста]

260. Серебрянных дел мастер из 4 фунтов серебра сделал 6 лампад весом
каждая в 12 лотов 1 золотник и еще 9 крестов. Сколько веса в каждом? [6
лотов]

261. Лавочник продал 23 аршина ситца по 13 коп. и 7 аршин плиса по 43
коп. и на вырученные деньги купил пуд сахару. Сколько стоит фунт сахару?
[15 коп.]

262. У меня в погребе всегда горит лампа. В ней в 15 мин сгорает
золотник керосина. Сколько керосина сгорает в сутки? [1 фунт]

263. Старшему сыну я даю по 4 коп. в день, а младшему по 45 коп. в
месяц. Но они эти деньги делят пополам. Сколько получает каждый в год?
[10 руб.]

264. Бабе заказали кусок холста. Она решила, что может соткать его в 25
дней, работая по 6 часов в день. Но первые 15 дней она работала только
по 4 часа. Сколько часов должна она работать в остальные дни, чтобы
окончить работу к тому же сроку? [9 часов]

265. Портной купил 3&#189; аршина сукна по 2 руб. 40 коп. и сделал из
него шапочки, положив на каждую по 7 вершков сукна. Приклад стоил ему 1
руб. 60 коп. Почем должен он продавать шапочку, чтобы получить прибыли 2
руб.? [По 1 руб. 50 коп.]

266. Торговец променял 37 фунтов чаю по 4 руб. на 36 аршин сукна. Почем
должен он продавать аршин сукна, чтобы получить прибыли 32 руб.? [По 5
руб.]

267. У меня было 200 руб. Я купил корову, лошадь и избу, и у меня
осталось 11 руб. Лошадь вдвое дороже коровы, изба вдвое дороже лошади.
Цены? [27; 54; 108 руб.]

268. Лавочник купил за 3 руб. кусок ситца в 25 аршин и продавал аршин по
15 коп. Сколько барыша на рубль? [25 коп.]

269. Торговец променял 37 четвертей ржи по 6 руб. на 20 четвертей
пшеницы. Почем должен он продавать четверть пшеницы, чтобы получить
барыша 18 руб.? [По 12 руб.]

270. Купец купил 64 пуда сахару по 5 руб. и за провоз заплатил 30 руб.;
4 пуда у него украли. Почем должен он продавать сахар, чтобы получить
прибыли 70 руб.? [По 7 руб.]

271. В 4 недели у меня вышел фунт чаю. По воскресеньям выходит вдвое
больше, чем в будни, а именно на 15 коп. Сколько стоит фунт чаю? [2 руб.
40 коп.]

272. В школе равное число мальчиков и девочек. Всякому мальчику дали по
4 ореха, всякой девочке по 3 — всего 168 орехов. Сколько детей учится в
школе? [48]

273. 8 коров съедают в день 6 пудов 16 фунтов сена. Сколько съедят 10
коров? [8 пудов]

274. Два купца меняются товаром. Один дает 27 пудов сахару по 7 руб.
Другой дает чай, по 3 руб. фунт. Сколько фунтов? [63]

275. Двум братьям досталось 200 руб. Один получил вдвое больше другого и
сверх того 8 руб. Сколько получил каждый? [136; 64 руб.]

276. На простое письмо наклеивается 1 марка, на заказное — 2. Я отправил
18 писем и наклеил 25 марок. Сколько было писем простых? Сколько
заказных? [11; 7]

277. Десть бумаги стоит 15 коп. Сколько следует заплатить за 3 стопы 10
дестей? [10 руб. 50 коп.]

278. Я разделил 154 ореха между двумя мальчиками так, что один получил
столько десятков, сколько другой дюжин. Сколько орехов получил каждый?
[70; 84]

279. Работник в городе тратит в неделю 3 руб. 1 коп. Сколько истратит он
в 20 дней? [8 руб. 60 коп.]

280. Двум братьям досталось 200 руб. Один получил вдвое больше другого,
без 10 руб. Сколько получил каждый? [130; 70 руб.]

281. Я сею на десятину по 7 мер 4 гарнца. Сколько пойдет ржи на 12
десятин? [11 четвертей 2 мер]

282. 7 рабочих за 4 дня вырыли канаву в 168 саженей. Сколько нужно
рабочих, чтобы за 5 дней вырыть канаву в 120 саженей? [4]

283. Писец, работая по 7 часов в день, переписал в 4 дня 140 страниц.
Сколько страниц перепишет он за 6 дней, работая в день по 8 часов? [240]

284. Лавочник купил 5 пудов сахару за 32 руб. и продавал фунт по 20 коп.
Сколько получил он прибыли на рубль? [25 коп.]

285. Чиновник получает в год 2000 руб., а тратит в месяц 100 руб. Через
сколько лет у него накопится достаточно денег, чтобы купить имение в 240
десятин по 50 руб. десятина? [15]

286. За 5 руб. я купил 13 азбук по 18 коп. и 14 грифельных досок.
Сколько стоит доска? [19 коп.]

287. Богомолец, идя по 8 часов в день, прошел в 5 дней 160 верст.
Сколько часов в день должен он идти, чтобы в 10 дней пройти 280 верст?
[7 часов]

288. Одного старика спросили, как велика его семья. Он ответил: нас 2
брата; у меня 6 сыновей, и у каждого по 6 мальчиков; а у брата 7
сыновей, и у каждого по 7 девочек. Сколько человек в этой семье? [100]

289. У торговца есть продажная рожь. Если он продаст ее по 7 руб.
четверть, он получить 16 руб. барыша; если продаст ее по 4 руб., то
потерпит 8 руб. убытка. Сколько у него ржи, и почем он ее покупал? [8
четвертей; по 5 руб.]

290. У разносчика есть кусок ситца. Если он станет продавать аршин по 12
коп., он будет в убытке на 60 коп.; если по 17 коп., он получит 40 коп.
барыша. Сколько аршин в куске, и за сколько он его купил? [20 аршин; 3
руб.]

291. Я принес своим ученикам пряников. Хотел я дать каждому по 7, но 36
пряников не хватает. Если же я дам каждому по 6 пряников, то их у меня
останется 12. Сколько я принес пряников, и сколько у меня учеников?
[300; 48]

292. Нанята служанка за 96 руб. в год. Через год и 8 месяцев ее
рассчитали и дали ей деньгами 148 руб. и 15 аршин материи. Сколько стоит
аршин? [80 коп.]

293. За 5 аршин плиса и 7 аршин ситца я заплатил 2 руб. 80 коп.; а 5
аршин плиса и 3 аршина ситца стоят 2 руб. 20 коп. Сколько стоит аршин
того и другого? [35 коп.; 15 коп.]

294. За 3 четверти ржи и 4 четверти овса нужно заплатить 30 руб., а за 3
четверти ржи и 2 четверти овса — 24 руб. Сколько стоит четверть того и
другого? [6 руб.; 3 руб.]

295. Нужно проверить 360 тетрадей диктанта. Один учитель может проверить
их за 15 часов, другой за 10 часов, третий за 6 часов. За какое
количество времени проверят они тетради втроем? [За 3 часа]

296. Двум братьям досталось 240 руб. Если младший из своей части отдаст
старшему 25 руб., то у старшего будет вдвое больше, чем у младшего.
Сколько досталось каждому? [105; 135 руб.]

297. Трем братьям дали фунт орехов. Младший мог бы съесть его в 48
минут, средний в 24 минуты, старший в 16 минут. За какое время съедят
они его втроем? [За 8 минут]

298. Пришли 3 учителя просить бумаги для своих школ, а у меня ее только
стопа (480 листов). Один говорит: ее хватит мне на 96 дней, другой — на
120 дней, третий — на 160 дней. На сколько времени этой стопы хватит на
все 3 школы? [На 40 дней]

299. В школе равное число девочек и мальчиков. Я принес 234 ореха, и
каждому мальчику досталось по 5, каждой девочке по 4 ореха. Но девочки
обиделись, и в другой раз я принес столько орехов, что всем досталось по
6. Сколько орехов я принес? [312]

300. Куплено за 12 руб. 3 куска ситца одинаковой длины. Аршин первого
куска стоит 24 коп., второго — 20 коп., третьего — 16 коп. Сколько аршин
в каждом куске? [20]

301. Я отправляю на почту по 15 писем (с 7-копеечной маркой) в неделю.
Сколько трачу я на марки в год? [54 руб. 60 коп.]

302. Крестьянина спросили, сколько у него денег. Он отвечал: брат втрое
богаче меня, отец втрое богаче брата, дед втрое богаче отца; если
сложить все наши деньги, выйдет 1000 руб. Сколько у него денег? [25
руб.]

303. Виноторговец купил бочку вина за 450 руб. провоз стоил ему 18 руб.
Вино он разлил в 400 бутылок (по 3 коп.). Почем должен он продавать
бутылку, чтобы получить барыша 120 руб.? [По 1 руб. 50 коп.]

304. Виноторговец купил две бочки с вином: одну в 70 ведер за 350 руб.,
другую в 90 ведер за 450 руб. Вино это он смешал и разлил в бочонки по 8
ведер. Почем должен он продавать бочонок, если хочет получить 100 руб.
барыша? [По 45 руб.]

305. 7 мужчин и 9 женщин за дневную работу получили 9 руб. Мужчина
получает втрое больше женщины. Сколько тот и другая? [90 коп.; 30 коп.]

306. В лавке было 42 пуда 1 фунт сахару. Пришли 2 покупателя и купили
весь сахар. Один взял столько пудов, сколько другой фунтов. Сколько
купил каждый? [41 пуд; 1 пуд 1 фунт]

307. Из 62 аршин 7 вершков сукна сшили воспитанникам платье. На каждого
пошло 2 аршина 5 вершков. Сколько было воспитанников? [27]

308. Работник тратит в день на харчи 40 коп.; на все прочее в месяц 17
руб. Кроме того, он ежегодно посылает отцу 150 руб. Сколько зарабатывает
он в год? [500 руб.]

309. 13 серебрянных ложек весят 3 фунта 12 лотов 1 золотник. Сколько
будут весить 6 таких ложек? [1 фунт 18 лотов]

310. Стопа бумаги стоит 1 руб. 60 коп. Сколько будут стоить 3 дести и 3
листа? [25 коп.]

311. Чиновник служил 23 года без одного месяца и ежемесячно откладывал
по 40 руб. Сколько он накопил денег? [11000 руб.]

312. Я каждое воскресенье раздаю нищим по 77 коп. Сколько я раздаю в
год? [40 руб. 4 коп.]

313. Чиновник был на службе 16 лет и 8 месяцев и каждый месяц откладывал
по 7 руб. 50 коп. Сколько у него накопилось денег? [1500 руб.]

314. Пуд сахару стоит 7 руб. 20 коп. Сколько можно купить сахару на 65
руб. 52 коп.? [9 пудов 4 фунта]

315. Я купил за 75 коп. меру яблок. Дюжину этих яблок я продавал по 7
коп. и получил 37 коп. барыша. Сколько яблок было в мере? [192]

316. Купил я за 2 руб. 50 коп. 3 меры яблок, продал эти яблоки по 7 коп.
десяток и получил 65 коп. барыша. Сколько было яблок в каждой мере?
[150]

317. Нужно перевезти 64 куля ржи, весом каждый в 7 пудов 20 фунтов. На
подводу кладется по 15 пудов. Сколько нужно подвод? [32]

318. В лампадке сгорает в день 1 лот 1 золотник масла. Фунт масла стоит
48 коп. На сколько денег сгорит масла в год? [7 руб. 30 коп.]

319. Некто каждую неделю ездит в город, отстоящий от его дома на 63
версты. Сколько верст проездит он в год? [6552]

320. Красильщик на окраску сукна употребил пуд краски. На окраску аршина
идет 1 лот 1 золотник. Сколько аршин он окрасил? [960]

321. Из 63 аршин 4 вершков сукна сшиты ученикам блузы. На каждую пошло 2
аршина 12 вершков. Сколько было учеников? [23]

322. На бумажной фабрике машина изготовляет каждую минуту 100 листов
бумаги. Сколько стоп в сутки? [300]

323. Из 15 фунтов 20 лотов серебра сделаны подсвечники весом каждый в 1
фунт 1 лот 1 золотник. Сколько подсвечников? [15]

324. Лавочник за 8 руб. купил 17 фунтов пряников по 17 коп. и 73 фунта
орехов. Сколько стоит фунт орехов? [7 коп.]

325. Из 432 аршин сукна сшили ученикам штаны. На каждую пару идет 1
аршин 11 вершков. Сколько было учеников? [256]

326. В пекарне каждую минуту выпекают по калачу и завертывают его в лист
бумаги. Сколько бумаги выходит в сутки? [3 стопы]

327. Из пуда меди сделаны бубенчики, весом каждый в 5 лотов. Сколько
бубенчиков? [256]

328. От школы до церкви 25 саженей. Червячок проползает 5 дюймов в
минуту. За сколько времени доползет он от школы до церкви? [За 7 часов]

329. Из 2 фунтов 2 лотов 2 золотников серебра сделаны 2 креста, один в 4
раза тяжелее другого. Вес каждого из них? [1 фунт 21 лот 1 золотник; 13
лотов 1 золотник]

330. Из 3 фунтов меди сделаны 2 колокольчика, один в 3 раза тяжелее
другого. Сколько весит каждый? [2 фунта 8 лотов; 24 лота]

331. Из 148 аршин сукна сделаны блузы ученикам. На блузу идет 2 аршина 5
вершков сукна. Сколько было учеников? [64]

332. Стопа бумаги весит 7 фунтов 16 лотов. Сколько весит тетрадка в 8
листов? [4 лота]

333. Из 15 фунтов 20 лотов серебра сделаны подсвечники весом каждый в 1
фунт 1 лот 1 золотник. Сколько подсвечников? [15]

334. Сколько рельсов длиною в 3 аршина 2 вершка можно уложить в версту?
[480]

335. Ученик купил на 10 руб. 26 коп. грифельную доску, грамматику и
блузу. Грамматика в 7 раз дороже доски, блуза в 7 раз дороже грамматики.
Сколько стоит каждая из этих вещей? [18 коп.; 1 руб. 26 коп.; 8 руб. 82
коп.]

336. Я провел год в деревне, в Москве и в дороге — и притом в Москве в 8
раз больше времени, чем в дороге, а в деревне в 8 раз больше, чем в
Москве. Сколько дней провел я в дороге, в Москве и в деревне? [5; 40;
320]

337. Рабочий тратит на харчи по 16 коп. в день, а за квартиру платит по
80 коп. в неделю. Сколько он тратит в год? [100 руб.]

338. Машина печатает в минуту 5 листов. Сколько в сутки? [7200 листов]

339. Некто купил 27 аршин холста по 7 коп. и отдал его красить по 5 коп.
за аршин. При этом 2 аршина у него украли. Остальные он продал по 15
коп. Сколько получил он прибыли? [51 коп.]

340. Я продал 19 лошадей по 37 руб. и 11 коров по 27 руб. и на
вырученные деньги купил ржи по 8 руб. четверть. Сколько четвертей? [125]

341. Из 45 аршин 8 вершков сукна сделаны жилетки, и на каждую пошло 13
вершков. Сколько вышло жилеток? [56]

342. Продано 18 десятин земли по 36 руб. и 23 коровы по 24 руб. На
вырученные деньги куплена рожь по 7 руб. 50 коп. четверть. Сколько
четвертей? [160]

343. Из 529 аршин сукна солдатам сделаны штаны. На каждую пару пошло 1
аршин 7 вершков. Сколько было солдат? [368]

344. Купец продал 80 аршин сукна по 1 руб. 75 коп. и 16 аршин по 3 руб.
75 коп. На вырученные деньги он купил чаю, по 1 руб. 25 коп. фунт.
Сколько фунтов? [160]

345. Сколько рельсов длиною в 4 аршина 11 вершков можно положить в
версту? [320]

346. Куплено 9 десятин леса по 53 руб. и 19 десятин пахотной земли.
Купчая обошлась в 10 руб., а вся покупка в 100 руб. Сколько стоит
десятина пахоты? [27 руб.]

347. Пуд сахару стоит 7 руб. 60 коп. Сколько можно купить сахару на 57
руб.? [7 пудов 20 фунтов]

348. Пуд сахару стоит 6 руб. 80 коп. Сколько будет стоить 13 пудов 20
фунтов? [91 руб. 80 коп.]

349. Старика спросили, сколько ему лет. Он отвечал: если к каждому
полному десятку моих лет прибавить 2 года, будет 100 лет. Сколько ему
лет? [84]

350. Портниха купила 48 аршин лент по 19 коп. и разрезала их на 23
пояса, которые продавала по 44 коп. Сколько барыша? [1 РУб.]

351. На 28 учеников вышло 2 стопы 16 дестей бумаги. Сколько пойдет на 36
учеников? [3 стопы 12 дестей]

352. На 7 полотенец вышло холста 10 аршин 8 вершков. Сколько пойдет на
дюжину? [18 аршин]

353. На 17 крестиков пошло 28 лотов 1 золотник серебра. Сколько пойдет
на две дюжины? [1 фунт 8 лотов]

354. 24 лота краски стоят 75 коп. Сколько стоит пуд? [40 руб.]

355. В течение февраля вышло 7 фунтов сахару. Сколько в день? [8 лотов]

356. На 5 рубашек идет 37 аршин 8 вершков холста. Сколько на дюжину? [90
аршин]

357. Некто в 5 минут проезжает 375 саженей. Сколько проедет он в час? [9
верст]

358. 27 фунтов орехов стоят 1 руб. 89 коп. Сколько стоит пуд? [2 руб. 80
коп.]

359. Баба, работая 8 дней по 5 часов в день, выткала 10 аршин полотна.
Сколько она выткет в 12 дней, работая по б часов в день? [18 аршин]

360. Два работника за свою работу получили вместе 40 руб. Один работал 4
дня по 7 часов, другой 9 дней по 8 часов. Сколько должен получить
каждый? [11 руб. 20 коп.; 28 руб. 80 коп.]

361. Чиновник получает в год 900 руб. и тратит в месяц 55 руб. За
сколько времени он накопит достаточно денег, чтобы купить дом, который
стоит 3600 руб.? [В 15 лет]

362. Чиновник откладывает каждый месяц по 12 руб. 50 коп. Через какое
время у него накопится 3000 руб.? [20 лет]

363. Чиновник каждый месяц откладывал одинаковую сумму денег. Через 20
лет он на эти деньги купил дом, ценой в 5400 руб. Сколько откладывал он
в месяц? [22 руб. 50 коп.]

364. Два брата близнеца дожили до 72 лет. Один всегда спал по 8 часов в
сутки, другой по 6. Сколько лет проспал каждый? [24; 18]

365. Мыши каждый месяц съедают у меня по 5 баранок. В фунте их 10.
Сколько баранок съели мыши у меня за 20 лет? [3 пуда]

366. Я продал 75 коров за 5000 руб. Из этих коров было голландских вдвое
больше, чем русских, и они проданы вдвое дороже. Почем продавал я
голландскую корову, почем русскую? [80; 40 руб.]

367. Пуд стеариновых свечей стоит 9 руб. 60 коп. В фунте 4 свечи. На
сколько сгорит у меня свечей в феврале (простого года), если в каждый
вечер будет сгорать по 6 свечей? [На 10 руб. 8 коп.]

368. Двум своим сыновьям я дал денег поровну. Один на свои деньги купил
15 пряников, другой — 25 яблок. Пряник на 2 коп. дороже яблока. По
сколько дал я им денег? [По 75 коп.]

369. Дед мой прожил 83 года и 4 месяца. Сколько он прожил месяцев?
[1000]

370. 10 яблок и 5 пряников стоят 35 коп., а 10 пряников и 5 яблок стоят
40 коп. Сколько стоит пряник, сколько стоит яблоко? [3 коп.; 2 коп.]

371. У меня на письма (по листу письмо) выходит в год стопа почтовой
бумаги. Посылаю я письма на почту 4 раза в месяц. Сколько каждый раз?
[10]

372. Девочка каждый день откладывала по несколько копеек и через год на
эти деньги купила книгу. Брат ее откладывал втрое больше. Через какое
время у него накопится достаточно денег, чтобы купить 7 таких книг? [2
года 4 месяца]

373. У меня 7 человек детей. Если дать каждому сыну по 4 ореха, у меня
останется 28 орехов. Если дать каждой дочери по 3 ореха, останется также
28 орехов. Сколько у меня орехов, сыновей и дочерей? [40; 3; 4]

374. Крестьянин каждую неделю ходил в город за почтой. До города 65
верст. Сколько верст прошел он в год? [6760]

375. Сестра моя откладывала каждый месяц по 25 коп. и в конце года на
эти деньги купила серебрянную ложку. Я откладываю в месяц по 60 коп.
Через сколько времени можно будет мне купить дюжину таких ложек? [Через
5 лет]

376. Пришли ко мне за бумагою 3 учителя. У одного 41 ученик, у другого
28, у третьего 27. У меня всего стопа бумаги. Сколько листов я должен
дать каждому? [205; 140; 135]

377. На карауле сменяют часового через 7 часов. Сколько караульных
сменилось в неделю? [24]

378. Родник в 24 минуты дает бочку воды. Сколько в сутки? [60 бочек]

379. Торговец за 100 руб. купил 2 пуда чаю и распродал его за 120 руб.
Сколько барыша взял он на фунт? [25 коп.]

380. Я на свои деньги могу купить или 12 фунтов пряников, или 15 фунтов
орехов. Фунт пряников на 5 коп. дороже фунта орехов. Сколько у меня
денег? [3 руб.]

381. Кусок ситца весит 10 фунтов. Каждый вершок весит золотник. Сколько
аршин в куске? [60]

382. Три ямщика перевезли 675 пудов, причем на подводу клали по 25
пудов. У одного ямщика столько пар лошадей, сколько у другого троек, а у
третьего четверок. Сколько пудов перевез каждый? [150; 225; 300]

383. Куплен фунт чаю за 1 руб. 60 коп., а золотник продан по 3 коп.
Сколько барыша на лот? [4 коп.]

384. Ваня от дома до школы делает 1200 шагов. Шаг его — аршин. Учебных
дней в зиму — 150. Сколько верст делает он в зиму, ходя в школу? [240
верст]

385. Лавочник променял 4 пуда сахару по 16 коп. фунт и 2 пуда 16 фунтов
кофе, по 40 коп. фунт, на 1 пуд чаю. Сколько стоит фунт чаю? [1 руб. 60
коп.]

386. У купца есть продажная рожь. Если он продаст ее по 5 руб. за
четверть, у него будет 25 руб. убытка; если по 8 руб. за четверть, у
него будет 50 руб. барыша. Сколько у него было ржи, и почем он ее
покупал? [25 четвертей по 6 руб.]

387. Я торгую землю. Просят по 40 руб. за десятину. Но у меня не хватает
60 руб. на покупку. Если же мне уступят по 35 руб., то у меня еще
останется 10 руб. Сколько десятин в этой земле и сколько у меня денег?
[14 десятин; 500 руб.]

388. Я принес своим ученикам орехов. Если дам каждому по 5, то 3-м
ученикам не хватит. Если же дам каждому по 4, то 11-ти ученикам старшей
группы могу прибавить по 3 ореха. Сколько орехов, сколько учеников?
[225; 48]

389. Кабатчик купил сороковую бочку вина за 150 руб. Вино он разлил в
5-ведерные бочонки, приливая к каждому по ведру воды, и бочонки продавал
по 25 руб. Сколько барыша? [100 руб.]

390. Кабатчик купил сороковую бочку вина за 160 руб. Вино он разлил в
3-ведерные бочонки, приливая к каждому по полведру воды. Бочонок он
продавал по 15 руб. Сколько барыша? [80 руб.]

391. От города до деревни 63 версты. Из обоих мест одновременно
отправились друг другу навстречу двое. Один мог бы проехать эти 63
версты в 9 часов, другой пройти их в 18. Через сколько часов они
встретятся? [Через 6 часов]

392. У меня каждый месяц выходит по 3 фунта 32 золотника чаю по 1 руб.
80 коп. фунт. Сколько стоит мне чай в год? [72 руб.]

393. У меня в неделю выходит 6 фунтов 24 золотника сахару по 16 коп.
фунт. Сколько стоит мне сахар в год? [52 руб.]

394. Я продал 43 четверти ржи по 7 руб. и 23 четверти льняного семени по
13 руб. и на вырученные деньги купил картофелю по 2 руб. 40 коп.
четверть. Сколько четвертей? [250]

395. У помещика было 42 четверти льняного семени. Из них 19 он продал по
13 руб., а остальные по 11. На вырученные деньги он купил 40 четвертей
пшеницы. Почем четверть? [12 руб. 50 коп.]

396. Лавочник продал 23 аршина ситца по 17 коп. и 29 аршин по 21 коп. На
вырученные деньги он купил пуд винных ягод. Почем фунт? [25 коп.]

397. Покупаю я для писем марки в 7 и в 3 коп. Купил я 44 марки и
заплатил 2 руб. Сколько было марок 7-, сколько 3копеечных? [17; 27]

398. В одной семье тратится в день 64 золотника сахару, и в февраль на
сахар вышло 2 руб. 80 коп. Сколько стоит пуд сахару? [6 руб.]

399. В тетрадке 32 страницы, и стоит она 5 коп. Каждый ученик исписывает
в день 4 страницы. Учебных дней в зиме 144. На сколько нужно купить
тетрадок для 23 учеников? [На 20 руб. 70 коп.]

400. Учебных недель в зиму 21. Учеников в школе 48, и каждому ученику в
неделю дают по перу. Гросс перьев стоит 60 коп. На сколько выйдет перьев
в зиму? [4 руб. 20 коп.]

401. Парня спросили, сколько ему лет? Он отвечал: отцу было 28 лет,
когда мне было 4; а теперь отец вдвое старше меня. Сколько парню лет?
[24]

402. У меня 13 человек детей. У мальчиков столько зубов во рту, сколько
у девочек пальцев на руках и на ногах. Сколько мальчиков, сколько
девочек? [5; 8]

403. Хотел я дать каждому из моих учеников по 17 перьев и купил 2
гросса. Но одному ученику одного пера не хватило. Сколько у меня
учеников? [17]

404. 17 писцов взялись в 2 дня переписать мне 600 страниц. В первый день
каждый переписал по 18 страниц. Но на второй День трое из них не пришли.
По сколько страниц должен переписать каждый из остальных во второй день?
[21]

405. Нанял я работника, с тем что в первый месяц я заплачу ему рубль, а
затем каждый месяц буду прибавлять к его жалованью по рублю. Прослужил
он у меня до тех пор, пока это не составило 8 руб. за каждый месяц его
службы. Сколько месяцев он прослужил? [15]

406. Купил я 25 пудов сахару, и хватило его на 2 года 38 недель и 4 дня.
Сколько сахару выходило в день? [1 фунт]

407. Двое вышли одновременно друг другу навстречу из двух городов,
отстоящих один от другого на 75 верст. Один проходит в час 4 версты,
другой 3?. Через сколько часов они встретятся? [10]

408. Между двумя городами 51 верста. Из них одновременно навстречу друг
другу вышли 2 путника. Один проходит в час 4 версты, другой 4&#189;.
Через сколько часов они встретятся? [6]

409. Между двумя городами 150 верст. Из них выехали одновременно друг
другу навстречу двое. Один проезжает в час 6 верст, другой 6&#189;.
Через сколько часов они встретятся? [12]

410. У портного 14 аршин сукна. На поддевку идет 2&#189; аршина. Сколько
выйдет поддевок? [6]

411. Я встретил несколько нищих и хотел дать им по 3 коп. Но у меня на
это не хватило 2 коп. Если же я бы дал каждому по 2 коп., то у меня
осталось бы 7 коп. Сколько было нищих и сколько со мною было денег? [9
нищих; 25 коп.]

412. У меня было 54 пряника, и я каждый день съедал по 4&#189;. На
сколько дней хватило? [12]

413. Некто каждую неделю зарабатывает 36 руб., а в год тратит 672 руб.
Сколько он откладывает в месяц? [100 руб.]

414. 7 вершков галуна стоят 10&#189; коп. Сколько стоит аршин? [24 коп.]

415. У купца 36 фунтов чаю. Если он продаст их по 2 руб. 50 коп., будет
10 руб. убытка. Почем должен он продать их, чтобы было 8 руб. барыша?
[По 3 руб.]

416. Купец меняет бумагу на кофе. Стопа бумаги стоит 2 руб. 40 коп. За
каждый лист ему дают по золотнику кофе. Сколько стоит фунт кофе? [48
коп.]

417. Купец меняет овес на сукно. За 3 гарнца овса ему дают 2 вершка
сукна. Овес по 3 руб. 20 коп. четверть. Сколько стоит аршин сукна? [1
руб. 20 коп.]

418. Пуд свечей стоит 8 руб. В фунте 4 свечи. Что будет стоить освещение
дома в феврале, если каждый вечер сгорает 6 свечей? [8 руб. 40 коп.]

419. Приказчик служил у купца 2 года. Год с месяцем он получал по 19
руб. в месяц; затем стал получать по 23 руб. Сколько заработал он в эти
2 года? [500 руб.]

420. Я выкуриваю каждое воскресенье по 30 папиросок, каждый будний день
по 20, а день по болезни совсем не курил. Из фунта табаку выходит 600
папирос. Сколько фунтов табаку у меня выходит в год? [13]

421. Сапожник в 5 дней может сшить 3 сапога. Сколько пар сапог сошьет он
в год, если в году 280 рабочих дней? [84]

422. Из 3 аршин сукна выходит 8 шапок. Сколько шапок выйдет из 37 ?
аршин? [100]

423. Пришел торговец с гребенками, и я хотел купить их все. Просит он за
гребенку по 15 коп., но у меня не хватает рубля. Если же он уступит их
по 12 коп., то после покупки у меня останется еще 20 коп. Сколько
гребенок у разносчика, и сколько у меня денег? [40; 5 руб.]

424. Если я продам свой овес по 3 руб. куль, у меня не хватит 4 руб.,
чтобы купить лошадь, которую я торгую. Если же продам его по 4 руб., то
я куплю и лошадь, и корову, стоящую 28 руб. Сколько просят за лошадь?
[100 руб.]

425. Ко мне пришло несколько нищих. У меня не хватает 5 коп., чтобы дать
каждому по 7 коп. Если же я дам каждому по 6 коп., то у меня останется
10 коп. Сколько пришло нищих, и сколько у меня денег? [15; 1 руб.]

426. Ящик с пряниками стоит 3 руб. 50 коп. Но у меня только 2 руб. 10
коп., и на эти деньги мне дают 15 фунтов. Сколько фунтов в ящике? [25]

427. Три брата разделили поровну наследство. Но когда каждый из них
издержал по 1000 руб., у всех вместе осталось столько, сколько получил
каждый. Как велико наследство? [4500 руб.]

428. У меня два имения. Первое втрое больше второго, в котором на 400
десятин меньше, чем в первом. Сколько у меня десятин? [800]

429. У меня было вдвое больше денег, чем у брата, но когда мы издержали
по рублю, я стал втрое богаче брата. Сколько у нас было денег? [4 руб.;
2 руб.]

430. У меня вдвое больше денег, чем у брата. Если же он мне из своих
денег отдаст рубль, у меня будет втрое больше денег, чем у него. Сколько
денег у каждого из нас? [8 руб.; 4 руб.]

431. Торговец купил 50 гроссов перьев по 80 коп. и продавал каждое перо
по копейке. Сколько барыша на рубль? [80 коп.]

432. Сколько дней могу я прокормить 48 человек 60-ю пудами хлеба, если
каждый съедает в день 2&#189; фунта? [20]

434. На пальто пошло сукна на 11 руб. 60 коп. Аршин стоит 3 руб. 20 коп.
Сколько пошло сукна? [3 аршина 10 вершков]

435. В месяц вышло у меня 3&#189; фунта чаю на 8 руб. 40 коп. Сколько
стоит фунт? [2 руб. 40 коп.]

436. Между двумя городами 108 верст. За сколько времени можно доехать от
одного до другого, проезжая по сажени в секунду? [За 15 часов]

438. Паровая машина сжигает каждую минуту по фунту каменного угля.
Сколько сожжет она в неделю? [252 пуда]

439. 10 листов бумаги стоят 7 коп. Сколько стоит стопа? [3 руб. 36 коп.]

440. Фунт чаю променяли на четверть овса. Золотник чаю стоит 4 коп.
Сколько стоит гарнец овса? [6 коп.]

441. Четверть пшеницы променяли на 4 фунта чаю. Гарнец пшеницы стоит 15
коп. Сколько стоит золотник чаю? [2&#189; коп.]

442. Отец вдвое старше сына и втрое старше дочери. Сыну с дочерью 50
лет. Сколько лет отцу? [60]

443. Старик вдвое старше сына и вчетверо старше внука. Сын старше внука
на 20 лет. Сколько лет старику? [80]

444. Учителя спросили, сколько он может тратить в месяц. Он отвечал: у
меня 48 учеников; с каждого мне приходится в учебный день по 5 коп., а
учебных дней в году 150. Сколько может он тратить в месяц? [30 руб.]

445. Торговец купил 9 четвертей ржи по 87&#189; коп. меру и поменял их
на 15 четвертей овса. Почем четверть овса? [4 руб. 20 коп.]

446. Дюжина стальных перьев весит золотник. Сколько будет весить 8
гроссов? [1 фунт]

447. Я купил пуд баранок, и мне дали 5 баранок в придачу. Съедал я по
баранке в день, и мне хватило их на год. Сколько баранок в фунте? [9]

448. В году 150 учебных дней, но по субботам мы умственных задач не
решаем. Сколько мне нужно запасти задач на год, если каждая из двух
старших групп решает по 8 задач в вечер? [2000]

449. Я трачу в год на 7-копеечные марки 54 руб. 60 коп. Сколько писем
каждую неделю отправляю я на почту? [15]

450. Бумаги по 1 руб. 60 коп. стопа выходит в волостном правлении каждый
месяц 150 листов. На сколько выходит бумаги в год? [6 руб.]

451. Крестьянин мерил дорогу шестом в 7&#189; аршин. Он приложил его
1000 раз. Сколько он отмерил? [5 верст]

452. Между двумя городами 60 верст. Двое выехали одновременно из этих
городов друг другу навстречу. Один проезжает в минуту 75 сажень, другой
50 сажень. Через сколько часов они встретятся? [Через 4 часа]

453. Из двух деревень выехали одновременно друг другу навстречу 2
крестьянина. Один проезжает в час 6 верст, другой — 6 верст 250 саженей.
Встретились они через 8 часов. Сколько верст от одной деревни до другой?
[100]

454. В присутственном месте выходит каждый месяц 4 стопы 6 дестей 16
листов бумаги. Стопа бумаги стоит 2 руб. 50 коп. На сколько выходит
бумаги в год? [На 100 руб.]

455. Веревку в 39 футов длиною разрезали на 52 части. Сколько дюймов в
каждой части? [9]

456. Некто купил 50 аршин сукна по 25 коп. за вершок и продал его по 15
коп. за дюйм. Сколько барыша? [10 руб.]

457. Я продал 29 десятин по 31 руб. и купил 19 десятин. У меня осталось
500 руб. Почем куплена десятина? [21 руб.]

458. Кусок сукна по 1 руб. 90 коп. аршин стоит 95 руб. Я купил часть
этого сукна, и остаток стоит 36 руб. 10 коп. Сколько аршин я купил? [31]

459. В лавке был пуд сахару. Один покупатель купил 2/5 сахару, другой
1/3 остатка, третий 4 фунта. Сколько осталось? [12 фунтов]

460. У меня было 2 пуда муки. 3/10 этой муки пошли на хлеб, 3/7 остатка
— на блины. Изо всей остальной муки сделаны пироги, и на каждый пошло
2&#189; фунта. Сколько пирогов? [16]

461. Мы с братом вдвоем купили кусок сукна в 28 аршин за 98 руб. Но брат
взял 4-мя аршинами больше, чем я. Сколько заплатил каждый из нас? [56
руб.; 42 руб.]

462. У меня было 1000 руб. На 3/4 этих денег я купил землю, на 3/5
остатка избу, на остальные деньги 16 четвертей ржи. Почем четверть? [6
руб. 25 коп.]

463. Я смешал 5 пудов муки по 60 коп., 6 пудов по 70 коп. и 7 пудов по
90 коп. Сколько стоит пуд смеси? [75 коп.]

464. Купец смешал 2 фунта чаю по 1 руб. 20 коп., 3 фунта по 1 руб. 60
коп. и 4 фунта по 1 руб. 80 коп. и смесь продавал по 2 руб. фунт.
Сколько барыша? [3 руб. 60 коп.]

465. Я купил для школы 5 стоп бумаги, но из нее я сам исписал столько
листов, сколько ученики исписали дестей. Сколько дестей я исписал? [4]

464. Купец смешал 2 фунта чаю по 1 руб. 20 коп., 3 фунта по 1 руб. 60
коп. и 4 фунта по 1 руб. 80 коп. и смесь продавал по 2 руб. фунт.
Сколько барыша? [3 руб. 60 коп.]

465. Я купил для школы 5 стоп бумаги, но из нее я сам исписал столько
листов, сколько ученики исписали дестей. Сколько дестей я исписал? [4]

466. На стол можно уложить вдоль 8 Псалтирей, и тогда поперек ляжет 4
Псалтиря. Сколько можно уложить Псалтирей на стол? [32]

467. В ящик можно уложить вдоль 4 коробки спичек, и тогда поперек ляжет
3, и на каждую из этих коробок можно поставить еще по одной. Сколько
коробок уляжется в ящик? [24]

468. Я купил 7 аршин ситца по 15 коп. и 7 платков по 35 коп., а сестра
купила 7 аршин ситца по 15 коп. и 17 платков по 35 коп. Кто заплатил
более, и насколько? [Сестра на 3 руб. 50 коп.]

469. Чиновник получает в месяц столько, что может тратить каждую неделю
по 12 руб. Сколько получает он в месяц? [52 руб.]

470. Гросс стальных перьев стоит 60 коп. На дюжину перьев можно выменять
десяток листов бумаги. Сколько стоит стопа этой бумаги? [2 руб. 40 коп.]

471. Я 15 раз покупал по 24 тарелки. Но у меня разбили столько десятков,
сколько я купил дюжин. Сколько у меня осталось тарелок? [60]

472. Помещик продал 98 четвертей ржи по 8 руб. и 104 четверти овса по 4
руб. На эти деньги он прожил год. Сколько он тратил в месяц? [100 руб.]

473. Из пуда муки вышло 65 фунтов хлеба. Какой припек на фунт? [12
лотов]

474. Я купил 18 десятин земли: пахоты и покоса. Пахоты на 4 десятины
больше, чем покоса, и десятина пахоты на 2 руб. дешевле, чем десятина
покоса. Всего я заплатил 500 руб. Сколько стоит десятина пахоты и
десятина покоса? [27 руб.; 29 руб.]

475. В 2 часа 42 минуты я проехал 27 верст. Сколько верст проезжал я в
час? [10]

476. На 16 десятинах я посеял по 7 мер 4 гарнца ржи. Сколько четвертей
ржи я посеял? [15]

477. На окраску четырех кусков сукна по 42 аршина пошло 7 фунтов краски.
Сколько на аршин? [1 лот 1 золотник]

478. Пароход проходит версту в 2 минуты 30 секунд. Сколько пройдет он в
час? [24 версты]

479. Паровоз проезжает версту в 2 минуты 24 секунды. Сколько пройдет он
в час? [25 верст]

480. Землекоп может выкопать в день канаву в 41 сажень 2 аршина. За
сколько дней выкопает он такую канаву, длиною в версту? [12]

481. Сколько линеек длиною в 1 фут 3 дюйма можно уложить на протяжении 5
саженей? [28]

482. Копеечная свеча весит 1 лот 1 золотник. Сколько весят 600 свечей?
[25 фунтов]

483. Сколько монет поперечником в 1 дюйм 2 линии можно уложить в один
ряд на протяжении сажени? [70]

484. Сколько монет поперечником в 1 дюйм 5 линий можно уложить в один
ряд на протяжении сажени? [56]

485. Работники круглые сутки качали воду из колодца. Каждый работник
качал 45 минут. Сколько сменилось работников? [32]

486. Из 8 фунтов серебра сделаны стаканы, каждый в 21 лот 1 золотник.
Сколько стаканов? [12]

487. Из пуда меди сделали дюжину чайников. Сколько весит каждый? [3
фунта 10 лотов 2 золотника]

488. Окружность колеса — 1 аршин 14 вершков. Сколько раз обернется оно
на протяжении версты? [800]

489. В первые 4 месяца года у меня вышел пуд сахару. Сколько в день? [10
лотов 2 золотника]

490. Колесо тачки имеет в окружности 4 фута; сколько раз обернется оно
на протяжении версты? [875]

491. Из 9 фунтов муки испечено 16 белых хлебов. Сколько муки пошло на
каждый? [18 лотов]

492. Из 12 фунтов 16 лотов серебра сделаны ложки весом каждая в 6 лотов
2 золотника. Сколько дюжин? [5]

493. Я роздал 1 стопу 5 дестей бумаги моим ученикам, каждому по дести с
листом. Сколько у меня учеников? [24]

494. Я роздал 1 стопу 3 листа бумаги моим ученикам, каждому по дести без
листа. Сколько учеников? [21]

495. Некто мерил версту палкою в 1 аршин 8 вершков. Сколько раз приложил
он ее к земле на протяжении версты? [1000 раз]

496. Некто мерил дорогу шестом длиною в 1 сажень 1 фут 4 дюйма. Сколько
раз приложил он шест к дороге на протяжении версты? [420 раз]

497. Я продал 38 десятин земли по 38 руб. и купил 12 десятин по 37 руб.
Сколько осталось у меня денег? [1000 руб.]

498. Я купил пуд чаю за 160 руб., а каждый золотник продавал по 5 коп.
Сколько барыша? [32 руб.]

499. Я купил б сотен яблок по 75 коп., а продавал дюжину по 10 коп.
Сколько барыша? [50 коп.]

500. Барышник купил 25 четвертей овса по 2 руб. 40 коп., а продавал
гарнец по 5 коп. Сколько барыша? [20 руб.]

501. Лавочник купил 5 стоп бумаги по 3 руб. 20 коп., а продавал бумагу
по копейке за лист. Сколько барыша? [8 руб.]

502. Я на б руб. купил марок в 3 и 7 копеек; 3-копеечных куплено 67.
Сколько куплено 7-копеечных? [57]

503. Два землекопа чинили дорогу. Один работал 35 дней и каждый день
чинил по 35 саженей. Другой работал 25 дней и каждый день чинил по 31
сажени. Сколько починили они вдвоем? [4 версты]

504. Я купил на рубашки ученикам 3 куска холста по 34 аршина. От этого
холста у меня осталось столько вершков, сколько пошло на рубашки аршин,
а на каждую рубашку пошло 4 аршина. Сколько у меня учеников? [24]

505. В лавку привезли 20-пудовой воз бумаги. Каждый лист весит золотник.
Сколько стоп привезли? [160]

506. У меня каждый день при колке сахара оказывается 1 золотник 48 долей
крошек. Через сколько дней этих крошек наберется фунт? [64]

507. Серебряный пятачок имеет в поперечнике 7 линий. Какую сумму
составят пятачки, уложенные в один ряд на протяжении сажени? [6 руб.]

508. На обшивку рубашки идет 4 аршина 4 вершка тесемки. Сколько рубашек
могу я обшить 85-ю аршинами тесемки? [20]

509. У меня 8 детей погодок, и всем им вместе 100 лет. Сколько лет
старшему и младшему? [16; 9]

510. Крестин в нашей церкви бывает в месяце 8 или, столь же часто, 9.
Священник наш священствует 40 лет. Сколько детей он окрестил? [4080]

511. Некто 4 дня сряду играет в карты и проиграл всего 17 руб. Каждый
день он проигрывал вчетверо больше, чем предыдущий. Сколько проиграл он
в четвертый день? [12 руб. 80 коп.]

512. В 4 недели я написал 160 писем. По воскресеньям я писал вдвое
больше писем, чем в будни. Сколько писем писал я в каждый будний день?
[5]

513. Я проехал 28 верст. Каждую минуту я проезжал по 100 саженей.
Сколько времени я ехал? [2 часа 20 минут]

514. В лавке 7 пудов 24 фунта сахару. Сколько в ней голов сахару, если
каждая весит 16 фунтов? [19]

515. В год у меня вышло 2&#189; стопы бумаги. Сколько листов выходило у
меня в месяц? [100]

516. Я купил сукна на платье 16 ученикам. На каждого идет 2&#189; аршина
по 2&#189; руб. Сколько стоит сукно? [100 руб.]

517. Старший брат откладывал 5 лет подряд по 500 руб., младший 6 лет
подряд по 250 руб. На эти деньги они купили по 80 десятин земли. Сколько
десятин земли досталось каждому? [50; 30]

518. Чиновник получает в год 1200 руб. жалованья, а тратит в месяц 65
руб. Через 4 года он купил на сбереженные деньги 35 десятин земли.
Сколько стоит десятина? [48 руб.]

519. Из фунта муки выходит 1 фунт 8 лотов печеного хлеба. Булочник купил
пуд пшеничной муки за 2 руб., испек из него булочки весом каждая 9 лотов
и продал их по 2 коп. Сколько барыша? [2 руб.]

520. Фунт ниток стоит 75 коп., и из него выходит 6 пар носков. Женщина в
неделю может связать 4 пары носков, которые продает по 25 коп. пару.
Сколько заработает она в 6 недель? [3 руб.]

521. Я купил на 7 руб. 50 коп. бумаги по 3 руб. стопа. Сколько из нее
выйдет тетрадей, по 4 листа каждая? [300]

522. Я продал 28 десятин земли по 26 руб. и 14 десятин по 23 руб. и
купил на вырученные деньги столько коров, сколько продал десятин.
Сколько стоит корова? [25 руб.]

523. Медник сделал 2 дюжины подсвечников весом каждый в 20 лотов и сотню
крестиков весом каждый в 8 лотов. Сколько пошло меди? [1 пуд]

524. От Москвы до Петербурга 604 версты. Поезд ехал по 40 верст в час и
останавливался б раз на 19 минут. Во сколько времени он доехал от Москвы
до Петербурга? [17 часов]

525. Сколько книг толщиною в 1 дюйм 4 линии можно уставить на полку
длиною в 2 аршина? [40]

526. От 1 января по 8 мая включительно (в год простой) я давал ежедневно
каждой из моих пяти лошадей по 1 гарнцу овса в день. Сколько издержал я
овса? [10 четвертей]

527. Я за 85 руб. купил 34 аршина сукна. Сколько будет стоить 40 аршин?
[100 руб.]

528. Фунт чаю стоит 2 руб. 40 коп., а я каждый день трачу по 1
золотнику. На сколько выпиваю я чаю за первые 4 месяца года (простого)?
[3 руб.]

529. Колокольня имеет высоту 40 аршин. В нижнем ярусе столько аршин,
сколько в верхнем фунтов. Сколько аршин в том и другом? [28; 12]

530. Комната имеет длину 2 сажени. Сколько нужно досок, шириною в 8
дюймов 4 линии, чтобы замостить пол? [20]

531. На грядке длиною в 5 саженей я посадил кустики малины на расстоянии
2 фута 11 дюймов. Сколько кустиков? [12]

532. Дочь ткет по 3 аршина в день, 4 дня она ткала одна, но затем стала
ткать и мать, которая ткет по 5 аршин в день. Когда их тканья стало
поровну, они прекратили работу. Сколько соткали они вдвоем? [60 аршин]

533. Мой шаг — 15 вершков. Сколько моих шагов в версте? [1600]

534. Рабочий зарабатывает в день 73 коп. и работает 300 дней в году.
Сколько может он тратить в день? [60 коп.]

535. Десть бумаги весит 8 лотов. Сколько стоп бумаги в пуде? [8]

536. Портной купил 13 кусков сукна по 77 аршин. Сколько из этого сукна
выйдет пар платья, если на пару идет 7 аршин? [143]

537. Некто в течение двух лет (1888 и 1889) выкурил 1 пуд табаку. На
сколько дней хватало ему фунта. [17]

538. Поезд проезжает в час 25 верст. Во сколько времени проезжает он
версту? [2 минуты 24 секунды]

539. Выстроена каменная стена вышиною в 5 саженей. Каждый камень вышиною
в 15 дюймов. Сколько пошло рядов камней? [28]

540. Почтовая контора закрыта только в Пасху и в двунадесятые праздники.
В остальные дни в ней тратится по 4 лота сургуча. Сколько в год? [1 пуд
4 фунта]

541. Из фунта сахару при колке получается 1 золотник 48 долей крошек. У
нас за зиму набралось крошек 5 фунтов. Сколько пудов сахару было
расколото? [8]

542. Вершок телеграфной проволоки весит 1 лот. Сколько весит верста
такой проволоки? [18 пудов 30 фунтов]

543. Из 7 фунтов меди сделаны бубенцы по 28 золотников каждый. Сколько
бубенцов? [24]

544. Из 4 фунтов 32 золотников меди сделаны крест, да ковш втрое тяжелее
креста, да чайник втрое тяжелее ковша. Вес? [32 золотника; 1 фунт; 3
фунта]

545. Стопа бумаги вышла у меня за 7&#189; месяцев. Сколько листов тратил
я в месяц? [64]

546. У булочника осталось столько муки, что он может сделать из нее 4
дюжины калачиков или 5 дюжин баранок. На калачик идет двумя золотниками
больше муки, чем на баранку. Сколько у него муки? [5 фунтов]

547. Для того чтобы починить дорогу, нужно 17 рабочих, из которых каждый
должен починить 47 саженей. Но подрядчик поставил только 13 рабочих, и
каждый починил только 23 сажени. Сколько осталось нечиненой дороги? [1
верста]

548. Длина бруска 8 футов 4 дюйма. Сколько из него можно напилить
чурочек длиною в 2 дюйма 5 линий? [40]

549. На сколько дней хватит 2&#189; фунта чаю, если каждый день тратить
по 7 золотников 48 долей? [32]

550. Женщина вышила ковер длиною в 7 аршин. Каждый день она вышивала по
длине 3&#189; вершка. Сколько дней она работала? [32]

551. Каждый месяц у меня выходит 3 фунта 10 лотов 2 золотника чаю.
Сколько в год? [1 пуд]

552. Сколько баранок выйдет из 10 фунтов 13 лотов 1 золотника муки, если
на каждую баранку идет 3 лота 1 золотник? [100]

553. Сколько тетрадей выйдет из 1 стопы 9 дестей 4 листов бумаги, если
на каждую тетрадку идет по 3 листа, да еще поллиста на обертку? [200]

554. Мельница в 9 минут может смолоть меру ржи. Сколько Четвертей может
она смолоть в сутки? [20]

555. Поезд проезжает версту в 1 минуту 15 секунд. Во сколько времени мог
бы он проехать, не останавливаясь, 1152 версты? [В сутки]

556. Стопа бумаги весит 25 фунтов. Сколько будут весить 1200 книг,
каждая в 16 листов? [25 пудов]

557. Из пуда меди сделано 2 самовара. В одном столько лотов, сколько в
другом золотников. Вес каждого? [30 фунтов; 10 фунтов]

558. Из ведра молока выходит 80 золотника масла. Сколько масла выйдет из
48 ведер? [1 пуд]

559. Некто в течение года откладывал каждый день по 25 коп. и на эти
деньги купил 73 аршина сукна. Почем аршин? [1 руб. 25 коп.]

560. Я задумал число. Если прибавить к нему его треть, выйдет 72. Какое
число? [54]

561. Гарнец ржи продается по 12&#189; коп. Сколько стоит четверть? [8
руб.]

562. Золотник лекарства стоит 12&#189; коп. Сколько стоит фунт? [12
руб.]

563. Два работника починили 2 версты дороги. Один починил столько
сажень, сколько другой аршин. Сколько каждый? [1 версту 250 саженей; 250
саженей]

564. Я продал 24 четверти пшеницы по 12&#189; руб. и 32 четверти ржи по
7&#189;. Сколько получил я денег? [540 руб.]

565. Я купил 1 гросс ручек для перьев. Каждая стоит 2&#189; коп. Сколько
заплатил я за гросс? [3 руб. 60 коп.]

566. Я купил 48 десятин земли по 22&#189; руб. Сколько я заплатил? [1080
руб.]

567. Лист золотой бумаги стоит 2&#189; коп. Сколько стоит стопа такой
бумаги? [12 руб.]

568. Я продал свою рожь по 7&#189; руб. четверть и получил 180 руб.
Сколько я продал четвертей? [24]

569. Купец продал 20 аршин материи по 17&#189; коп. Сколько получил он
денег? [3 руб. 50 коп.]

570. Продал я 48 четвертей ржи по 7&#189; руб. и 96 четвертей картофеля
по 2&#189; руб. Сколько я получил денег? [600 руб.]

571. Два работника починили 2 версты дороги — один столько аршин,
сколько другой футов. Сколько каждый? [1 версту 200 саженей; 300
саженей]

572. Веревку в 11 аршин разрезали на два куска. В одном столько дюймов,
сколько в другом вершков. Сколько аршин в каждом? [4 аршина; 7 аршин]

573. У гроба Господня горит множество лампад. Во всех вместе сгорает
каждую минуту по 1 золотнику масла. Сколько в сутки? [15 фунтов]

574. Из двух городов, отстоящих один от другого на 85 верст,
одновременно выехали друг другу навстречу два путника. Один проезжает
версту в 7 минут 30 секунд, другой в 6 минут 40 секунд. Через сколько
времени они встретятся? [5 часов]

575. Лавочник купил ящик кофе за 24 руб. Из него он продал 15 фунтов за
7 руб. 20 коп. и на них получил барыша 1 руб. 20 коп. Сколько было
фунтов кофе в ящике? [60]

576. В воскресенье в 8 часов вечера выехали друг другу навстречу 2
поезда из двух городов, отстоящих один от другого на 603 версты. Один
проезжает в час 38 верст, другой 29 верст. Когда они встретятся? [В
понедельник в 5 часов утра]

577. Торгую я землю. Просят по 23 руб. за десятину, но на покупку у меня
не хватает 15 руб. Если же землю уступят по 17 руб. за десятину, у меня
останется 15 руб. Сколько десятин в участке и сколько у меня денег? [5
десятин; 100 руб.]

578. Работник тратит на себя 40 коп. в день, а получает за каждый
рабочий день 60 коп. К концу года у него накопилось 34 руб. Сколько он
дней работал? [300]

579. Работник тратил на себя 80 коп. в день. Работал он в году 320 дней
и отложил 188 руб. Сколько получал он за рабочий день? [1 руб. 50 коп.]

580. Я купил 3 пуда 23 фунта железа и заплатил 10 руб. 1 коп. Что будут
стоить 29 фунтов железа? [2 руб. 3 коп.]

581. Две артели рабочих вымостили улицу. В первой было 70 человек, и
каждый вымостил по 2 сажени 6 футов. Во второй было 56 человек, и каждый
вымостил по 3 сажени 4 фута. Найти длину улицы? [400 саженей]

582. Лавочник купил 7 фунтов чаю по 1 руб. 50 коп., а продавал золотник
по 2 коп. Сколько получил он барыша? [2 руб. 94 коп.]

583. Лошадь проскакала в 1час 13 минут 20 верст 1 сажень. Сколько
пробегала она в минуту? [137 саженей]

584. Я купил 7 аршин сукна по 3 руб. 43 коп., и мне уступили 1 копейку.
Сколько я заплатил? [24 руб.]

585. Я задумал число. Если к нему прибавить его половину, выйдет 96.
Какое число? [64]

586. В году 144 учебных дня, и каждый день ученик исписывает 1&#189;
страницы (в четвертушку). Сколько листов испишет он в год? [27]

587. Куплен за 200 руб. бочонок вина, в котором 240 бутылок. Порожняя
бутылка стоит 3 коп. Почем нужно продавать каждую бутылку вина, чтобы
получить прибыли 80 руб. 80 коп.? [1 руб. 20 коп.]

588. Чиновник служит 6 лет 8 месяцев с жалованьем в 37 руб. 50 коп. в
месяц. Сколько получил он за все время службы? [3000 руб.]

589. Сыну 16 лет, а отец через 8 лет будет вдвое старше сына. Сколько
лет отцу? [40]

590. Поезд проезжает версту в 1 минуту 15 секунд. Сколько проедет он в 7
часов 20 минут? [352 версты]

591. 96 кулей овса весом каждый в 7 пудов 20 фунтов нужно перевезти на
40 подводах. Сколько пудов нужно класть на каждую подводу? [18]

592. Надо перевезти 48 кулей овса весом каждый 6 пудов 10 фунтов. На
подводу кладут 20 пудов. Сколько подвод? [15]

593. Рабочий тратит в день на харчи 60 коп., а на все остальное 6 руб.
75 коп. в месяц. Работает он в году 300 дней. Сколько получает он за
рабочий день? [1 руб. ]

594. Железнодорожный поезд проезжает в сутки 888 верст. Сколько проедет
он в сутки и 13 часов? [1369 верст]

595. Я купил 28 аршин плиса и 12 аршин ситца и заплатил 13 руб. В другой
раз я по тем же ценам купил 28 аршин плиса и 7 аршин ситца и заплатил 12
руб. 25 коп. Сколько стоит аршин плиса и аршин ситца? [40 коп.; 15 коп.]

596. У купца спросили, сколько у него сахару? Он отвечал: столько
золотников, сколько в неделе минут. Сколько у него сахару? [2 пуда 25
фунтов]

597. В казарме стоит 80 солдат, и каждому выдается в день по 2 фунта 16
лотов хлеба. Сколько пудов хлеба выходит на них в год? [1825]

598. За 2 руб. куплено 12 аршин ситца двух сортов: по 19 коп. и по 15
коп. аршин. Сколько аршин каждого сорта? [5; 7]

599. Я купил за 300 руб. 12 десятин земли, в том числе лес по 37 руб.
десятина и пахоту по 19 руб. десятина. Сколько было куплено леса,
сколько пахоты? [4; 8]

600. Из стопы бумаги сделаны тетради в 2&#189; листа каждая. Сколько
тетрадей? [192]

601. Из 200 листов бумаги сделаны 24 тетради двух сортов: по 7 листов и
по 11 листов. Сколько каждого сорта? [16; 8]

602. Учитель получает в месяц 37 руб. 50 коп. Из них он каждый месяц
посылает матери и брату по 10 руб. На платье он тратит в год 50 руб., на
книги 14 руб. Сколько он тратит в день на все остальное? [40 коп.]

603. Ямщик едет со скоростью 7&#189; верст в час. Сколько проедет он в 2
часа 24 минуты? [18 верст]

604. Учитель получает в месяц 36 руб. Учебных дней в году 144, и в
каждый учебный день 5 часовых уроков. Сколько получает он за каждую
минуту ученья? [1 коп.]

605. Два путника одновременно вышли друг другу навстречу из двух
городов, отстоящих один от другого на 111 верст. Один проходит в час 4
версты 250 саженей, другой — 4 версты 375 саженей. Через сколько времени
они встретятся? [12 часов]

606. Два путника одновременно отправились друг другу навстречу из двух
городов, отстоящих один от другого на 63 версты. Один проходит в час 3
версты 125 саженей, другой проезжает в час 7 верст 125 саженей. Через
сколько времени они встретятся? [6 часов]

607. У купца столько золотников сахару, сколько в году минут. Сколько у
него сахару? [136 пудов 35 фунтов]

608. 9 ткачей работали 8 дней по 7 часов в день и выткали 168 аршин.
Сколько аршин выткут 10 ткачей в 9 дней, работая по 8 часов в день?
[240]

609. Внуку 14 лет, а деду 56. Через сколько лет дед будет вдвое старше
внука? [28]

610. 7 баб работали 5 дней по 8 часов и выткали 140 аршин холста.
Сколько выткут 6 баб в 7 дней, работая по 9 часов в день? [189 аршин]

611. У меня было 73 четверти овса. Лошади съели столько четвертей,
сколько свиньи мер, и сколько куры гарнцев. Сколько съели лошади,
сколько свиньи и сколько куры? [64 четверти; 8 четвертей; 1 четверть]

612. Баба ткала 6 дней, по 10 часов в день. Аршин она ткет в 37&#189;
минут. Сколько она выткала аршин? [96]

613. Мальчик учился 144 дня и каждый день писал по 2&#189; страницы.
Сколько страниц он написал? [360]

614. Купец купил 4 сороковых бочки вина по 100 руб. Вино он разлил в
4-ведерные бочонки, приливая к каждому 1&#189; ведра воды, и продал
бочонки по 15 руб. Сколько получил он барыша? [560 руб.]

615. Ткач работал 12 дней и каждый день ткал по 6&#189; аршин материи, а
затем в течение 32 дней ткал ежедневно лишь 3&#189; аршина. Сколько
всего он выткал аршин? [190]

616. Портниха сшила 6 платьев, на которые пошло по 6&#189; аршин
материи, и 26 детских платьев, на которые пошло по 3&#189; аршина.
Сколько всего пошло аршин материи? [130]

617. У торговца было 4 сороковых бочки вина. Часть этого вина он разлил
в 16 бочонков, вмещающих по 6&#189; ведер. Остаток он разлил в бочонки,
вмещающие по 3&#189; ведра. Сколько понадобилось последних? [16]

618. От дома до церкви 2 версты. Дорога идет столько футов лесом,
сколько саженей полем. На каком протяжении идет она лесом, на каком
полем? [125 саженей; 1 верста 375 саженей]

619. Артель рабочих починила в 19 дней 7 верст 110 саженей дороги.
Сколько может она починить такой же дороги в 13 дней? [4 версты 470
саженей]

620. Началась война. Из Петербурга через каждые 18 минут отправляется
поезд из 25 вагонов, и в каждом вагоне сидит по 50 солдат. Сколько
солдат выедет из Петербурга в течение суток? [100000]

621. Сколько стоит верста железной дороги, если на нее истрачено столько
рублей, сколько в ней аршин, футов и вершков, и столько полтинников,
сколько в ней дюймов? [50000 руб.]

622. Чиновник получает жалованья 146 руб. в месяц, да еще за частные
занятия по 24 руб. в неделю. Сколько может он тратить в месяц? [250
руб.]

623. Из двух городов, отстоящих друг от друга на 600 верст, выехали
одновременно друг другу навстречу 2 поезда. Один проезжает 39 верст в
час, другой 5 саженей в секунду. Через сколько времени они встретятся?
[8 часов]

624. Поезд железной дороги в сутки может проехать 1200 верст. Во сколько
времени проезжает он версту? [1 минута 12 секунд]

625. У меня было 2000 руб. Купил я 48 десятин пашни по 28 руб. Сколько
могу я еще купить десятин луга, если десятина его на 13 руб. дороже
десятины пашни? [16]

626. Купил я за 1000 руб. участок земли в 24 десятины. Десятина пашни
стоит 36 руб., десятина леса 53 руб. Сколько в этом участке пашни,
сколько леса? [16 десятин; 8 десятин]

627. В учебном заведении на воспитанников Великим Постом (7 недель)
каждый день выходит по 7 фунтов масла по 7 коп. При закупке этого масла
было дано бумажками 25 руб. Сколько сдачи? [99 коп.]

628. Некто в течение 48 лет каждый день по 2 часа играл в карты. Сколько
лет жизни потерял он на игру? [4 года]

629. Я купил сукна и бархата -— всего 253 аршина. Сукна столько вершков,
сколько бархата дюймов. Сколько аршин того и другого? [161; 92]

630. От нас до Иерусалима 3100 верст. Отправился туда богомолец и прошел
столько саженей пешком, сколько аршин проехал по железной дороге и
сколько футов на пароходе. Сколько верст сделал он каждым из этих
способов? [2100; 700; 300]

631. Я в один год прочел Библию. Каждое воскресенье я читал по 7
страниц, каждый будний день по 2 страницы. Не дочитал я только 10
страниц. Сколько страниц в Библии? [1000]

632. Из золотника табаку выходит 5 папиросок. Сколько из 25 фунтов? [12
000]

633. В течение года я прожил в деревне в 8 раз больше, чем в Петербурге,
а в дороге провел 8 раз меньше времени, чем в Петербурге. Сколько дней
провел я в деревне, в Петербурге, в дороге? [320; 40; 5]

634. Я купил 7 ящиков с мылом. В каждом было по 7 коробок, в каждой
коробке по 7 кусков. Еще купил я 3 ящика; в каждом было по 17 коробок, в
каждой по 7 кусков. Каждый кусок мыла весом по 8 лотов. Сколько весило
все мыло? [1 пуд 15 фунтов]

635. За 777 руб. я купил уздечку, седло, лошадь и карету. Сколько стоит
каждая из покупок, если каждая вшестеро дороже предыдущей? [3; 18; 108;
648]

636. Купец наторговал в 5 лет 10000 руб. Каждый год он приобретал
столько, сколько в предыдущие годы вместе взятые. Сколько наторговал он
в каждый год? [625; 625; 1250; 2500; 5000]

637. В 4 дня я поймал 120 мух, каждый день столько, сколько в предыдущие
вместе. Сколько каждый день? [15; 15; 30; 60]

638. Некто в каждый будний день пропивает по 16 коп., а в каждое
воскресенье столько, сколько во все будние дни недели. Сколько в год?
[100 руб.]

639. Мать для приданого своей дочери с самого ее рождения откладывала
ежегодно столько аршин холста, сколько ей лет. Когда дочери минуло 20
лет, из этого холста сшили рубашки, и на каждую пошло 7 аршин. Сколько
рубашек? [30]

640. Поезд, не останавливаясь, может проехать в сутки 960 верст. Сколько
он проедет в сутки, если из каждого часа 12 минут 30 секунд идут на
остановки? [760 верст]

641. Сколько человек могу я прокормить в течение недели 7 пудами 14
фунтами муки, если каждому в день выдается по 3 фунта хлеба, и из 7
фунтов муки выходит 9 фунтов хлеба? [18]

642. Веревку в 10 аршин я разрезал на 2 куска. В одном столько футов,
сколько в другом аршин. Сколько аршин в каждом? [7 аршин; 3 аршина]

643. Веревку в 3 сажени 2 аршина я разрезал на 2 куска. В одном столько
вершков, сколько в другом дюймов. Сколько аршин в каждом? [7 аршин; 4
аршина]

644. Живописец написал портрет и получил за него 300 руб. Писал он 5
раз, каждый раз по 1 часу 40 минут. Сколько зарабатывал он в час? [36
руб.]

645. Маленький мальчик прошел версту. Шаг его — 7&#189; вершков. Сколько
он сделал шагов? [3200]

646. Из пуда меди медник сделал подсвечник, чайник, кастрюлю и самовар.
Каждая вещь втрое тяжелее предыдущей. Вес? [1 фунт; 3 фунта; 9 фунтов;
27 фунтов]

647. Лист бумаги весит 2 золотника. Сколько нужно подвод (по 20 пудов),
чтобы перевезти 10000 стоп такой бумаги? [125]

648. Отец откладывал для сына со дня его рождения по стольку 10-рублевых
бумажек в год, сколько сыну было лет. Когда ему минуло 24 года, отец
купил на эти деньги для сына землю по 40 руб. за десятину. Сколько
десятин? [75]

649. У трех братьев-купцов капитал — миллион. Средний в 3 раза богаче
младшего, старший в 7 раз богаче среднего. Сколько у каждого? [40000;
120000; 840000]

650. Я торгую участок леса. Просят по 80 руб. за десятину. Но у меня не
хватает 20 руб. Если же мне уступят по 76 руб., у меня останется 56 руб.
Сколько в лесу десятин и сколько у меня денег? [19 десятин; 1500 руб.]

651. У меня была веревка в 7 аршин. Я отрезал от нее столько дюймов,
сколько в ней вершков. Сколько осталось? [3 аршина]

652. Сколько тетрадей можно сделать из пуда бумаги, если стопа весит 5
фунтов, а на тетрадь идет 3 листа? [1280]

653. Часы отстают каждый день на 1 минуту 30 секунд. Через сколько дней
будут они опять показывать верно? [480]

654. Я купил собаку, ошейник и чашку, чтобы кормить собаку. За все
заплатил я 10 руб. без копейки. Каждая покупка в 10 раз дешевле
предыдущей. Цены? [9 коп.; 90 коп.; 9 руб.]

655. Я купил за 80 руб. корову и лошадь. Корова стоит столько
пятиалтынных, сколько лошадь четвертаков. Узнать цену коровы и лошади?
[30 руб.; 50 руб.]

656. Я купил дом и имение и за все заплатил 10 000 руб. За дом я
заплатил столько 3-рублевых, сколько за имение 5-рублевых бумажек. Цены?
[3750 руб.; 6250 руб.]

657. Я купил равное число аршин ситца и полотна, заплатил 5 руб. 28 коп.
Ситец по 1 коп. вершок, полотно по 1 коп. дюйм. По сколько аршин того и
другого я купил? [По 12]

658. Купец продал 47 аршин плиса по 47 коп., к вырученным деньгам
приложил копейку и на все купил 170 аршин ситца. Почем аршин? [13 коп.]

659. Из Москвы в Шую вышли одновременно 2 поезда. Один проезжает в час
40 верст, другой 35. Первый пришел в Шую часом раньше. Сколько верст от
Москвы до Шуи? [280]

660. Двум бабам было заказано по одинаковому числу аршин холста. Одна
ткет в день 12 аршин, другая — 9. Вторая кончила свою работу 5-ю днями
позже, чем первая. По сколько аршин им было заказано? [По 180]

661. Мать с дочерью взялись соткать 210 аршин холста и сочли, что если
будут работать вместе, то соткут холст в 15 дней (работая одинаково
быстро). Но дочь села за работу 5-ю днями позже, чем мать, и все-таки
свою половину доткала к сроку. Сколько аршин ткала в день мать, сколько
дочь? [7; 10 1/2] '

662. Я вдвое богаче брата. Но если к моим деньгам прибавить 140 руб., а
к его деньгам 640 руб., у нас будет поровну. Сколько у каждого? [1000;
500]

663. Я купил четверть ржи и четверть овса и заплатил 10 руб. Врат мой по
тем же ценам купил 3 четверти ржи и 5 четвертей овса и заплатил 36 руб.
Цены? [7 руб.; 3 руб.]

664. Два писца переписали вместе 336 страниц. Пока один переписывал 7
страниц, другой переписывал только 5. Сколько страниц переписал каждый?
[196; 140]

665. За 5 аршин бархата и 7 аршин сукна заплатили 56 руб. Аршин бархата
на 4 руб. дороже, чем аршин сукна. Сколько стоит аршин того и другого?
[7 руб.; 3 руб.]

666. За 12 десятин пахотной земли и 7 десятин леса я выплатил 792 руб.
Десятина леса втрое дороже десятины пахоты. Сколько стоит та и другая?
[24; 72 руб.]

667. Некто нанялся на фабрику за 312 руб. в год. Через 3 года 4 месяца
он получил 900 руб. деньгами и 35 аршин сукна. Почем сукно? [4 руб.]

668. У меня 500 руб. бумажками, 10- и 5-рублевыми. Вторых 10-ю больше,
чем первых. Сколько тех и других? [30; 40]

669. Я на 100 руб. купил чаю, 3- и 4-рублевого. Второго на 4 фунта
больше, чем первого. Сколько того и другого? [12; 16]

670. Я за 16 руб. купил Часословов и молитвенников — всего 52 книги.
Часослов стоит 32 коп., молитвенник 24 коп. Сколько тех и других? [44;
8]

671. Купец променял 15 четвертей овса на чай. Сколько фунтов чаю он
получил, если за каждый гарнец овса ему давали по 2 золотника чаю? [20
фунтов]

672. Купец променял 35 аршин сукна на бархат. Сколько аршин бархата он
получил, если за каждый вершок сукна ему давали по дюйму бархата? [20
аршин]

673. Сколько стоп бумаги нужно, чтобы покрыть десятину, если в каждом
листе квадратный аршин? [45]

674. Я купил у разносчика 2 куска кумача красного по 16 коп. и синего по
14 коп. аршин — за 4 руб. 60 коп. Синего было 5-ю аршинами больше, чем
красного. Сколько аршин в каждом куске? [13; 18]

675. За 1000 руб. я купил 30 десятин земли, покосной и пахотной.
Десятина покоса стоит 37 руб., десятина пашни 32 руб. Сколько той и
другой? [8; 22 десятины]

676. В течение двух лет я каждый вечер зажигал лампадку, а по субботам
она горела всю ночь. По субботам выгорало по 2 лота, в остальные дни по
золотнику. Только два раза (в будни) я забыл зажечь лампадку. Сколько у
меня вышло масла за два года? [13 фунтов]

677. Собака увидала зайца за версту и бросилась за ним. Заяц пробегает в
час 30 верст, собака 36. Через сколько времени собака догонит зайца? [10
мин.]

678. Работник на фабрике издерживает каждый день на себя 80 коп. и кроме
того каждый месяц посылает жене в деревню по 9 руб. Получает он за
рабочий день 1 руб. 60 коп. Сколько дней в году он работает? [250]

679. У меня 3 сына чиновника. Получают они равное жалованье; но одному
оно выдается раз в год, другому каждый месяц, третьему каждую неделю, а
вместе они получают 1872 руб. По сколько получает каждый за раз? [624;
52; 12]

680. Я за 100 руб. купил кошку, 2 собаки и лошадь. Цена 2 собакам
равная. Кошка в 9 раз дешевле, а лошадь в 9 раз дороже каждой собаки.
Цены? [1; 9; 9; 81 руб.]

681. Продаются лошади, свиньи и собаки. Каждая свинья в 8 раз дороже
собаки. Каждая лошадь в 8 раз дороже свиньи. Я купил 4 собаки, 4 свиньи
и 1 лошадь и заплатил 200 руб. Сколько стоят собака, свинья, лошадь? [2;
16; 128 руб.]

682. Три писца, работающие равно, заработали вместе 100 руб. Один
работал 14 дней по 5 часов, другой 10 дней по 8 часов, третий 25 дней по
4 часа. Сколько заработал каждый? [28 руб.; 32 руб.; 40 руб.]

684. Работник на фабрике каждый день тратил на себя по 40 коп. и посылал
своей жене по 4 руб. 50 коп. в месяц. Работал он в году 250 дней.
Сколько получал он за рабочий день? [80 коп.]

685. Из стопы бумаги сделаны тетради по 4 и по 3 листа. Первых на 15
больше. Сколько каждого сорта? [75; 60]

686. В школе ученье продолжается 28 недель, и каждому ученику выдается в
неделю по стальному перу. За зиму издержано 7 гроссов. Сколько учеников?
[36]

687. За 1600 руб. куплено 26 десятин земли, леса и пашни, а именно 17
десятин пашни и 9 десятин леса. Десятина леса на 42 руб. дороже десятины
пашни. Цены? [47; 89 руб.]

688. Из 10 фунтов 13 лотов 2 золотников серебра сделаны равные
подсвечники весом каждый в 25 лотов 2 золотника. Сколько? [13]

689. Из 10 футов 13 лотов серебра сделаны кресты (равные), каждый в 12
лотов 1 золотник. Сколько? [27]

690. Из 20 фунтов 27 лотов меди сделаны чайники, весом каждый в 23 лота.
Сколько? [29]

691. Учительского помощника спросили, сколько он получает жалованья? Он
ответил: «По копейке в час». Сколько в месяц? [7 руб. 20 коп.]

692. Ткацкая машина работала весь февраль безостановочно, изготовляя по
дюйму сукна в минуту. Сколько аршин она выткала? [1440]

693. Учу я в школе 15 лет, каждый год по 300 дней, каждый день по 6
часов. Сколько часовых уроков дал я за это время? [27000]

694. В учебном заведении учат б учителей. Один дает в неделю 1 урок,
другой 2, третий 3, четвертый 4, пятый 5, шестой 6. Получили они вместе
1575 руб. Сколько каждый? [75; 150; 225; 300; 375; 450]

695. Лавочник начал торговлю с 800 руб. Каждый год он наживал по
полтиннику на рубль. Сколько у него будет денег через 3 года? [2700
руб.]

696. Лавочник в конце года на все деньги, вырученные от продажи чаю,
покупает опять чай. Обходится ему чай в 1 руб. 60 коп., а продает он его
по 2 руб. Начал он торговлю с 64 фунтов чаю. Сколько фунтов купил он
через 3 года? [125]

697. Лавочник начал торговлю с 400 руб. и каждый год наживал по
полтиннику на рубль. Сколько денег будет у него через 4 года? [2025
руб.]

698. У нас в год вышло 13 голов сахару по 13 фунтов и 14 голов по 14
фунтов. Сколько сахару выходило в день? [1 фунт]

699. Купец каждый день откладывает поровну денег. На эти деньги он купил
в конце года 10 аршин сукна по 10 руб., 11 аршин бархата по 11 руб. и 12
аршин парчи по 12 руб. Сколько откладывал он в день? [По 1 руб.]

700. Откладывал я по рублю в день в течение двух лет без одного дня. На
эти деньги я купил земли по 27 руб. за десятину. Сколько десятин? [27]

701. Я купил 17 голов сахару по 17 фунтов и 21 голову по 21 фунту. На
сколько времени хватит мне этого сахару, если буду тратить по 1 фунту в
день? [На 2 года]

702. Сделаны две дюжины подсвечников весом каждый в 1 фунт 1 лот 1
золотник. Сколько пошло на них серебра? [25 фунтов]

703. У отца был сын Касьян. До 20-летнего возраста отец каждый день
откладывал для него по рублю, кроме дня именин. В этот день свой рубль
сын получал на орехи. Когда Касьяну минуло 20 лет, на отложенные деньги
ему купили 200 десятин земли, а именно 130 десятин пашни по 26 руб. и 70
десятин леса. Почем десятина леса? [56 руб.]

704. В течение года у меня вышло 15 фунтов 6 лотов 2 золотника чаю. По
сколько выходило в день? [По 1 лоту 1 золотнику]

705. Медник из 25 фунтов меди сделал самовар, подсвечник и крест. В
самоваре столько фунтов, сколько в подсвечнике лотов и в кресте
золотников. Вес этих вещей? [24 фунта; 24 лота; 24 золотника]

706. Лавочник начал торговлю с 1000 руб. Каждый год он наживал по
полтиннику на рубль. Сколько денег у него стало в конце третьего года?
[3375 руб.]

707. Лавочник начал торговлю с небольшим капиталом и каждый год наживал
по полтиннику на рубль. В конце третьего года у него оказалось 675 руб.
С каким капиталом начал он торговлю? [200 руб.]

708. Кусок земли был перепродан 5 раз. Первый покупатель заплатил за
него 256 руб. Затем каждый владелец брал барыша по 25 коп. на рубль. Что
заплатил пятый покупатель? [625 руб.]

709. Лавочник начал торговлю с 625 руб. Каждый год он наживал по 20 коп.
на рубль. Сколько стало у него денег через 4 года? [1296 руб.]

710. Некто в течение года съел 26 хлебов в 26 фунтов и 28 хлебов в 28
фунтов. Сколько фунтов хлеба съедал он в день? [4 фунта]

711. 72 мальчика разделили 1 стопу 1 десть бумаги. Каждый мальчик часть
своей бумаги употребил на рисование, вдвое больше на диктант и на
чистописание вдвое больше, чем на диктант. Сколько листов каждый мальчик
употребил на рисование? [1 лист]

712. Из стопы бумаги сделаны 73 тетради, по 8 и по 4 листа. Сколько
каждого сорта? [47; 26]

713. 8 мужчин, 12 женщин и 16 детей за денную работу получили 15 руб.
Мужчина получал вдвое больше, чем женщина, женщина втрое больше, чем
дитя. По сколько каждый? [90 коп.; 45 коп.; 15 коп.]

714. Купец поменял 27 фунтов чаю по 4 руб. на сукно ценою в 2 руб. 40
коп. аршин. Почем должен он продавать это сукно, чтобы получить барыша
18 руб.? [По 2 руб. 80 коп.]

715. Я купил за 400 руб. 8 овец, 6 коров, 4 лошади. Корова втрое дороже
овцы, лошадь вдвое дороже коровы. Сколько стоит каждая скотина? [8 руб.;
24 руб.; 48 руб.]

716. Я купил 16 аршин сукна, 9 аршин бархата и 4 аршина парчи и за все
заплатил 200 руб. Бархат вдвое дороже сукна, парча вдвое дороже бархата.
Цены за аршин? [4 руб.; 8 руб.; 16 руб.]

717. У меня 2 улья. В апреле пчелы каждого улья собрали по 2 фунта меда.
В каждый из следующих 3 месяцев пчелы первого улья собрали вдвое, а
пчелы второго вчетверо больше, чем в предыдущий. Сколько меду оказалось
в обоих ульях к 1 августа? [5 пудов]

718. В начале года я купил 12 пачек конвертов. Написал я в году 237
писем, и у меня осталось 2 пачки и 13 конвертов. Сколько было конвертов
в пачке? [25]

719. Я 12 лет подряд откладывал по 12 руб. в месяц и на эти деньги купил
каждому из своих трех сыновей по 3 тройки лошадей. Сколько стоит лошадь?
[64 руб.]

720. Я купил 16 ученицам ситца на платья. На каждое платье идет 16 аршин
по 16 коп. На каждом платье мне уступили по 6 коп. Сколько я заплатил?
[40 руб.]

721. Я купил 11 коробок с мылом, в каждой по 11 кусков, каждый кусок по
11 коп. и 37 гребенок по 37 коп. Сколько я заплатил? [27 руб.]

722. При наводнении вода в реке подымалась в течение суток: в первый час
на 1 дюйм, во второй на 2, в третий на 3, и т.д. Насколько вода прибыла
в сутки? [На 25 футов]

723. Некто тратит на харчи по 40 коп. в день, за квартиру платит 12 руб.
50 коп. в месяц, да на прочие издержки у него выходит по 2 руб. в
неделю. Сколько он тратит в год? [400 руб.]

724. Могу купить на свои деньги или 10 аршин бархата, или 8 аршин парчи.
Аршин парчи на 2 руб. 50 коп. дороже аршина бархата. Сколько у меня
денег? [100 руб.]

725. Купец купил кусок сукна в 100 аршин и заплатил за него 350 руб.
Разделив его на 2 части, из которых одна на 28 аршин больше другой, он
продал большую часть по 2 руб. 50 коп., меньшую по 4 руб. аршин. Сколько
получил он барыша? [46 руб. убытка]

726. Нужно переписать 378 листов. Один писец может переписать их в 63
дня, другой в 54, третий в 27. Во сколько дней перепишут они эти 378
листов вместе? [14 дней]

727. Я купил 43 десятины леса по 93 руб. и 23 десятины по 87 руб.
Сколько я заплатил? [6000 руб.]

728. Я купил за 5000 руб. 49 десятин елового леса по 51 руб. и еще 41
десятину леса соснового. Сколько стоит десятина леса соснового? [61
руб.]

729. Некто получает в месяц 18 руб. 25 коп. Сколько может он тратить в
день? [60 коп.]

730. Двое выехали одновременно из одного города в другой. Первый ехал по
12 верст в час и приехал на место двумя часами раньше, чем другой,
который ехал по 9 верст в час. Какое расстояние между городами? [72
версты]

731. Двум бабам было заказано по одинаковому количеству холста. Одна
ткет в день 6, другая 8 аршин. Первая кончила свою работу 4-мя днями
позже, чем другая. Сколько им было заказано аршин холста? [192]

732. Купец купил 100 аршин сукна по 5 руб. и разрезал сукно на 2 части,
из коих одну продал по 4, другую по 9 руб. за аршин, причем не получил
ни барыша, ни убытка. Сколько аршин в каждой части? [80; 20]

733. Два поезда выехали друг другу навстречу из двух городов, которые
отстоят один от другого на 1001 версту. Один проезжает версту в 2 минуты
24 секунды, другой в сутки проезжает 1248 верст. Через сколько часов они
встретятся? [13]

734. Купец променял 2 пуда сахару на 4 стопы бумаги, а бумагу на 6
фунтов чаю. Золотник чаю стоит 2&#189; коп. Сколько стоит пуд сахару? [7
руб. 20 коп.]

735. Окружность переднего колеса 7 футов, заднего — 10 футов. Переднее
сделало 150-ю оборотами больше, чем заднее. Сколько проехала повозка? [1
версту]

736. Подрядчик взялся доставить известное количество дров по 5 руб.
сажень. 35 саженей он купил сам по 3 руб. Остальные дрова обошлись ему
по 6 руб. Получил он 5 руб. барыша. Сколько саженей дров взялся он
доставить? [100]

737. Я дал одному ученику 3 ореха, а всем остальным по 5. Если бы я всем
дал по 4 ореха, у меня осталось бы 15. Сколько было орехов? [83]

738. У торговца есть бумага. Продавая стопу по 2 руб. 25 коп., он будет
в убытке на 2 руб. 40 коп. Если он продаст ее по 2 руб. 75 коп., получит
5 руб. 60 коп. барыша. Сколько у него стоп, и почем он покупал стопу?
[16; по 2 руб. 40 коп.]

739. Торговец смешал 28 фунтов чаю по 3 руб. 50 коп. с 24 фунтами чаю по
4 руб. 25 коп. Почем он должен продавать фунт смешанного чаю, чтобы
получить прибыли 8 руб.? [По 4 руб.]

740. Если к моим деньгам прибавить 4 руб., у меня будет столько же,
сколько у моего брата. Если к моим деньгам прибавить 55 руб., у меня
будет вчетверо больше, чем у брата. Сколько денег у каждого? [13 руб.;
17 руб.]

741. У меня не хватило 20 руб., чтобы купить лошадь. Но отец подарил мне
200 руб., и я тогда купил тройку таких лошадей. Сколько стоит каждая
лошадь? [90 руб.]

742. Я купил ситца четырех сортов: 16 аршин по 16 коп., 8 аршин по 18
коп., 16 аршин по 13 коп. и 28 аршин по 14 коп. Сколько я заплатил? [10
руб.]

743. За кусок ситца просят 4 руб. 8 коп. Если бы в нем было на 4 аршина
менее, он стоил бы 3 руб. 40 коп. Сколько в нем аршин? [24]

744. От школы до церкви 20 сажень, и положено 12 досок, чтобы проходить
по грязи. Есть доски в 7 и в 4 аршина длины. Сколько тех и других? [4 по
7 аршин; 8 по 4 аршина]

745. Стену вышиною в 6 аршин я обшил тесом. Пошла 21 тесина, 6 и 4
вершков. Сколько тех и других? [6 по 6 вершков; 15 по 4 вершка]

746. Матери и 3 дочерям заказали 60 аршин сукна. Мать и старшая дочь
вместе ткут вдвое скорее средней и младшей вместе, а именно — по 10
аршин в день. За сколько времени будет соткано все сукно? [В 4 дня]

747. Хорошая ткачиха ткет в день по 15 аршин холста на мешки. На мешок
идет 3&#189; аршин холста. Сколько выткет она мешков в 7 зимних месяцев,
работая по 24 дня в месяц? [720]

748. Нужно сделать 80 тетрадей, из них 8 по 5 листов, 28 по 7 и 24 по 6
листов. Сколько на это нужно бумаги? [1 стопа]

749. Купил я 32 аршина ситца по 17 коп., 32 аршина по 23 коп., 18 аршин
по 13 коп. и 28 аршин по 27 коп. Сколько я заплатил? [20 руб.]

750. Мне нужна была веревка в 40 саженей. Я связал 11 веревок, 12- и
9-аршинных. Сколько тех и других? [7 по 12 аршин; 4 по 9 аршин]

751. За 1000 руб. я купил 44 коровы по 18 и 26 руб. Сколько тех и
других? [18; 26]

752. За 1000 руб. я купил 26 коров по 18 руб., 18 коров по 26 руб. и 8
свиней. Сколько стоит свинья? [8 руб.]

753. Муж и жена в течение 4 лет откладывали деньги. Оба в первый год
отложили по 10 руб. Но в каждый следующий год муж откладывал в 7 раз, а
жена только в 3 раза больше, чем в предыдущий. Во сколько раз сбережения
мужа больше сбережений жены? [В 10 раз]

754. Из 31 аршина 4 вершков холста сделаны полотенца и стирники, всего
18 штук. На полотенце идет 1 аршин 13 вершков, на стирник 1 аршин 11
вершков. Сколько тех и других? [7; 11]

755. Нужно замостить пол в комнате. У меня есть доски в 4 и в 6 вершков
ширины. Первых пошло бы на 8 больше. Длина комнаты? [6 аршин]

756. Путь от дворца до собора при Высочайших выходах устилается коврами.
Если устлать его коврами в 8 аршин длины, пойдет двумя коврами больше,
чем если устлать его коврами в 9 аршин. Сколько сажень от дворца до
собора? [48]

757. Из 10 фунтов 13 лотов 1 золотника серебра сделано 25 подсвечников.
Сколько веса в каждом? [13 лотов 1 золотник]

758. Из 15 фунтов 20 лотов серебра сделаны подсвечники весом каждый в 1
фут 9 лотов 2 золотника. Сколько вышло подсвечников? [12]

759. В Соловецком монастыре происходит непрерывное чтение Псалтири по
умершим. Псалтирь прочитывается весь в 7&#189; часов. Сколько раз в год?
[1168]

760. Сделано 32 стакана по 10 лотов 2 золотника и 16 крестов по 8 лотов
2 золотника. Сколько пошло серебра? [15 фунтов]

761. 2 стопы 1 десть 15 листов бумаги я роздал ученикам, каждому по 1
дести 13 листов. Сколько было учеников? [27]

762. На лошадей у меня вышло 5 четвертей 3 меры 1 гарнец овса. На каждую
лошадь по 1 мере 7 гарнцев. Сколько у меня лошадей? [23]

763. Я продал 320 четвертей ржи по 6 руб. 25 коп. и на вырученные деньги
купил лошадь, избу и землю. Изба в 7 раз дороже лошади, земля в б раз
дороже избы. Цены? [40 руб.; 280 руб.; 1680 руб.]

764. Сколько 20-фунтовых хлебов нужно испечь в течение февраля на 36
учеников, если каждый съедает в день по 2&#189; фунта? [126]

765. В неугасимую лампаду входит 1 фунт масла, и выгорает он в 3 суток 1
час. Сколько масла выходит в год? [3 пуда]

766. Работник отправился в город. Там он зарабатывал по 10 руб. в месяц.
Тратил он каждый день на харчи 20 коп., за квартиру платил 3 руб. 45
коп. в месяц, да еще на мелочи тратил по 30 коп. в неделю. Сколько он
задолжал к концу года? [10 руб.]

767. Отцу 40 лет, сыну 17. Через сколько лет отец будет вдвое старше
сына? [6]

768. Батюшка наш служит 40 лет. Сколько обеден он отслужил, если считать
по 3 на неделю? [6340]

769. Отец вдвое старше старшего сына, втрое — среднего, вчетверо —
младшего. Всем им вместе 150 лет. Сколько лет каждому? [72; 36; 24; 18]

770. Из пуда меди сделаны чайник, кастрюля и самовар. Кастрюля на 6
фунтов тяжелее чайника, самовар на 7 фунтов тяжелее кастрюли. Вес этих
вещей? [7; 13; 20 фунтов]

771. Некто в 5 дней прошел 80 верст, причем каждый день проходил 4-мя
верстами больше, чем в предыдущий. Сколько прошел он в первый день? [8
верст]

772. Из 2 фунтов меди сделаны 3 подсвечника. Второй на 3 лота тяжелее
первого, третий на 4 лота тяжелее второго. Вес? [18 лотов; 21 лот; 25
лотов]

773. Сын вдвое моложе отца, а дочь втрое моложе отца. Всем троим вместе
77 лет. Лета каждого? [42; 21; 14]

774. Ткач на станке самолете может выткать 15 аршин в день. 4 недели в
году он не работает, да и в остальные недели работает по 5 дней. Сколько
заработает он в год, если за аршин платят ему по 5 коп.? [180 руб.]

775. В ткацкой школе учится 61 девочка. Выткали они за зиму по 41 аршину
каждая. Только одна выткала аршином меньше. Сколько выткано аршин?
[2500]

776. В одной школе, имеющей 161 ученика, выходит за зиму 7 стоп бумаги.
Сколько нужно припасти бумаги на 2 школы, из коих одна имеет 48, другая
44 ученика? [4 стопы]

777. Сколько пудов муки нужно в год, чтобы прокормить 48 человек, если
каждый съедает в месяц 90 фунтов хлеба, а из 7 фунтов муки выходит 9
фунтов хлеба? [1008 пудов]

778. У меня ручной журавль. Он в 5 дней съедает гарнец овса. Сколько в
год? [1 четверть 1 мера 1 гарнец]

779. Барышник покупал гарнец овса по 5 коп. 6 четвертей такого овса он
поменял на 6 фунтов чаю. Каждые 3 фунта этого чаю он поменял на 20
фунтов кофе и продавал кофе по 64 коп. фунт. Сколько он может на барыш
купить фунтов чаю? [2]

780. Дал я одному из моих учеников 5 пряников, а остальным по 7. Если бы
я всем дал по 5, осталось бы 30 пряников. Сколько их у меня было? [110]

781. 6 братьев разделили поровну наследство. 3 младших издержали по 200
руб., и тогда у них втроем осталось столько, сколько у каждого из
старших. Как велико наследство? [1800 руб.]

782. Если прибавить к моим деньгам 50 руб., у меня будет столько же, как
у брата. Если прибавить к моим деньгам 650 руб., то у меня будет втрое
больше, чем у брата. Сколько у меня денег, сколько у брата? [250; 300
руб.]

783. Мальчик в минуту делает 100 шагов. Шаг его — 12 вершков. Идет он от
дома до школы ровно час. Как далеко от школы до дома? [3 версты]

784. 20 аршин сукна и 30 аршин бархата стоят 340 руб.; 1 аршин сукна и 1
аршин бархата стоят 13 руб. Сколько стоит аршин сукна и аршин бархата?
[5 руб.; 8 руб.]

785. Из пуда серебра сделаны 4 дюжины подсвечников. Сколько стоит
каждый, если золотник серебра стоит 27 коп. и за работу каждого
подсвечника берут 3 руб. 40 коп.? [25 руб.]

786. В школе 3 группы, и издержано за зиму бумаги 1 стопа 1 лист. На
старшую группу вышло втрое больше, чем на среднюю, а на младшую — втрое
меньше, чем на среднюю. Сколько на каждую? [13 дестей 21 лист; 4 дести
15 листов; 1 десть 13 листов]

787. В лавке было 729 грецких орехов, по 4 коп. дюжина. Все эти орехи
были куплены тремя покупателями. Первый взял столько пятков, сколько
второй десятков, а третий дюжин. Сколько заплатил каждый? [45 коп.; 90
коп.; 1 руб. 8 коп.]

788. У меня в огороде работали 5 дней 5 баб, по 25 коп. в день, и 15
дней работали 15 детей по 15 коп. в день. Сколько им всем следует
заплатить? [40 руб.]

789. Я на 20 рублей богаче брата. Если бы удвоить мои деньги, я был бы
втрое богаче его. Сколько у каждого? [60 руб.; 40 руб.]

790. Рельс в 1 сажень 12 вершков весит 6 пудов 10 фунтов. Пуд железа
стоит 80 коп. Что стоят рельсы на 1 версту (в 2 ряда)? [4000 руб.]

791. От одного города до другого 156 верст. Одновременно выехали из них
друг другу навстречу 2 путешественника. Один проезжает в час 7 верст,
другой — в минуту 50 саженей. Через сколько времени они встретятся? [12
часов]

792. Поезд выехал из Москвы в 5 часов утра и приехал в Тамбов в 6 часов
вечера того же дня. Останавливался он на пути 7 раз по 15 минут и
проезжал по 40 верст в час. Сколько верст от Москвы до Тамбова? [450]

793. На бумажной фабрике машина изготовляет по 1 дести бумаги в минуту.
Сколько стоп в неделю? [504]

794. Учитель дает уроки в трех домах: в одном получает 352 руб. в год, в
другом — 28 руб. в месяц, в третьем — 6 руб. в неделю. Сколько получает
он за уроки в год? [1000 руб.]

795. Некто продал 26 десятин по 28 руб. и 12 десятин по 31 руб. и на
вырученные деньги купил сукна по 2 руб. 75 коп. аршин. Сколько аршин?
[400]

796. Купец купил 12 пудов чаю по 2 руб. 50 коп. за фунт, из каждого
фунта взял по золотнику на пробу и весь остальной чай разложил в ящики,
по 19 фунтов каждый, и продавал ящик по 60 руб. Сколько барыша? [300
руб.]

797. Купец менял чай на сукно; за каждый вершок сукна он дал 1 лот 2
золотника чаю. Сколько сукна получил он за пуд чаю? [48 аршин]

798. Из 5&#189; аршин сукна сделаны штаны и поддевка. На штаны пошло
столько дюймов сукна, сколько на поддевку вершков. Сколько аршин на то,
сколько на другое? [2; 3&#189;]

799. Мать и дочь ткут вместе. Работают они в сутки 9 часов 20 минут.
Мать в 5 минут вытыкает вершок холста, а дочь в то время, как мать
вытыкает аршин, вытыкает только фут. Во сколько времени выткут они
вместе 100 аршин? [10 дней]

800. У отца 12 детей. Он разделил им 300 орехов. Каждому мальчику
столько, сколько у него зубов во рту, каждой девочке столько, сколько у
нее пальцев на руках и на ногах. Сколько мальчиков, сколько девочек? [5;
7]

801. Я за 3000 руб. купил 48 десятин земли. Из них 31 под лесом и стоят
по 71 руб. Почем остальные? [По 47 руб.]

802. Купец купил 8 цибиков чаю за 2000 руб. Каждые 5 фунтов он продавал
по 12 руб. и получил 400 руб. барыша. Сколько фунтов в цибике? [125]

803. Шаг маленького мальчика — 10 вершков. Делает он 80 шагов в минуту.
За сколько времени пройдет он версту? [В 30 мин.]

804. Купец продал 11 кусков парчи, каждый в 11 аршин, по 11 руб. аршин,
и 148 аршин бархата по 9 руб. 25 коп. аршин и на вырученные деньги купил
чаю, по 2 руб. 25 коп. за фунт. Сколько пудов? [30]

805. Из 6 золотников табаку выходит 25 папиросок. Сколько из 6 фунтов?
[2400]

806. На веревку длиною в сажень идет 13 лотов 1 золотник пеньки. Сколько
на веревку в 96 саженей? [1 пуд]

807. Мальчик проработал на поденщине по 26 коп. 26 дней и по 28 коп. 28
дней и заработал себе на хлеб на целый год. На сколько копеек он съедает
хлеба в день? [На 4 коп.]

808. Стояли березы, летели галки. На каждую березу село по галке, и
осталось 5 галок. Потом на каждую березу село по 2 галки, и осталось 5
берез без галок. Сколько галок, сколько берез? [Галок 20; берез 15]

809. Старший брат сказал младшему: «Дай мне 8 орехов, тогда у меня
орехов будет вдвое больше, чем у тебя». А младший сказал старшему: «Ты
дай мне 8 орехов, тогда у нас будет поровну». Сколько орехов у каждого?
[56; 40]

810. У двух мальчиков орехов поровну. Но если один отдаст другому 5
орехов, у последнего окажется втрое больше орехов, чем у первого. По
сколько у каждого? [По 10]

811. Я продал 44 десятины по 44 руб. и купил 29 десятин по 29 руб. На
сколько времени хватит оставшихся денег, если я буду тратить по 3 руб. в
день? [На год]

812. Копеечная свеча горит 1 час 13 минут. Перед иконою круглый год
горит такая свеча. Сколько это стоит? [72 руб.]

813. Я купил 29 коров по 29 руб., а брат мой 20 коров по 20 руб. и 21
корову по 21 руб. Кто из нас заплатил больше? [Поровну]

814. В ткацкой школе 40 девочек. Из них 16 старших выткали по 37 аршин
холста, остальные по 17. Из всего холста им сделали сарафаны (кругом по
6 аршин 4 вершка). Сколько каждой досталось сарафанов? [4]

815. Я купил 19 десятин леса по 121 руб. и 37 десятин пашни по 73 руб.
Сколько я заплатил? [5000 руб.]

816. В прошлом году у меня было 13 работников и каждый получал по 77
руб. В нынешнем году у меня 10-ю рабочими больше и каждый получает на 10
руб. больше, чем в прошлом году. На сколько возросли мои издержки на
жалованье? [На 1000 руб.]

817. Из Смоленска в 9 часов утра вышел поезд и доехал до Москвы в 6
часов 50 минут вечера того же дня. Ехал он по 49 верст в час и
останавливался 2 раза на &#189; часа и 5 раз на 10 минут. Сколько верст
от Москвы до Смоленска? [392]

818. От Москвы до Смоленска 392 версты. Из Москвы выехал в 3 часа утра
поезд и доехал до Смоленска в 7 часов 45 минут вечера того же дня.
Останавливался он на пути 2 раза на полчаса и 7 раз на 15 минут. Сколько
верст проезжал этот поезд в час? [28]

819. Из Москвы в Тверь выехали одновременно 2 поезда. Первый проходил в
час 39 верст и прибыл в Тверь двумя часами раньше второго, который
проходил в час 26 верст. Сколько верст от Москвы до Твери? [156]

820. Если я буду тратить по 60 руб. в неделю, у меня в год не хватит 200
руб. Сколько я могу тратить в день, не делая долгов? [8 руб.]

821. Сколько нужно заплатить за перевозку 80 четвертей ржи, если каждая
четверть весит 9 пудов, на подводу кладется по 16 пудов, и подвода стоит
60 коп? [27 руб.]

822. На скольких подводах можно перевезти 400 четвертей ячменя, если
четверть весит 6 пудов 20 фунтов, и на каждую подводу кладут 25 пудов?
[104]

823. На 25 подводах перевезли 96 четвертей овса весом каждая по 6 пудов
10 фунтов. Сколько пудов было положено на каждую подводу? [24]

825. 116 четвертей овса перевезены на 29 подводах. На каждую подводу
клали по 25 пудов. Сколько весит четверть овса? [6 пудов 10 фунтов]

826. 5 четвертей пшеницы стоят 64 руб., 7 четвертей 4 меры овса стоят 24
руб. Во сколько раз пшеница дороже овса? [В 4 раза]

827. За 3 руб. куплено 4 ящика с пряниками. Пряники были проданы по 17
коп. дюжина, и получено 1 руб. 25 коп. барыша. Сколько было пряников в
каждом ящике? [75]

828. Столяр хочет купить токарный станок, стоящий 270 руб. У него нет
денег, а есть 45 стульев. Но они некрашеные; окраска каждого стоит 17
коп., а провоз каждого до города — 13 коп. Почем должен он продавать
каждый стул, чтобы купить станок? [6 руб. 30 коп.]

829. Мы с братом хотим купить землю, которая стоит 2300 руб., платя
пополам. Но у меня только 894 руб., а у брата только 789 руб. Сколько
придется занять каждому из нас? [256 руб.; 361 руб.]

830. Я всем своим ученикам роздал орехов поровну. Четверо из них съели
по 12 орехов, и тогда у этих четверых вместе осталось столько орехов,
сколько получил от меня каждый из них. По сколько орехов я раздавал? [По
16]

831. Два купца меняются товаром. Один дает 34 аршина бархата по 6 руб.
50 коп. Другой дает сукно по 4 руб. 25 коп. Сколько аршин? [52]

832. Я выписал на 10 руб. азбук и Евангелий, всего 30 книг. Евангелие
стоит 59 коп., азбука — 24 коп. Сколько тех и других? [8; 22]

833. 8 плотников в 14 дней выстроили мне избу. Получали они по 75 коп. в
день. Такую же избу выстроила мне за ту же цену артель из 12 плотников,
которая проработала 10 дней. Сколько зарабатывали в день плотники второй
артели? [По 70 коп.]

834. Лавочник купил кусок сукна. Если он будет продавать аршин по 1 руб.
60 коп., он будет в убытке на 6 руб. Если будет продавать аршин по 2
руб., он получит 10 руб. барыша. Сколько аршин в куске, и сколько
заплатил за него лавочник? [40 аршин; 70 руб.]

835. Куплено 2 пуда сахару и 3 фунта чаю и заплачено 27 руб. В другой
раз по тем же ценам куплено 4 пуда сахару и 5 фунтов чаю и заплачено 51
руб. Сколько стоит пуд сахару, что фунт чаю? [9 руб.; 3 руб.]

836. Куплено 2 четверти ржи и 3 четверти овса за 26 руб. По тем же ценам
куплено 3 четверти ржи и 2 четверти овса и заплачено 29 руб. Сколько
стоит четверть ржи, что четверть овса? [7 руб.; 4 руб.]

837. Мне нужно устроить школу; я рассчитал, что если в нынешнем и
будущем (1891, 1892) году я буду откладывать по рублю в день, я могу эту
школу через 2 года открыть. При этом постройка будет в 6 раз дороже, чем
школьная мебель, а мебель в 6 раз дороже, чем книги, на первый раз
нужные. Что будет стоить постройка, мебель, книги? [612; 102; 17 руб.]

838. У меня 5 человек детей. Дал я им пряников поровну. Трое из них
съели по 5 пряников, и тогда у всех троих осталось столько пряников,
сколько у двух остальных. Сколько всех пряников роздано? [75]

839. Мне нужно вырыть в 1 день канаву в 208 саженей 1 аршин. Сколько
нужно мне поставить работников, если каждый может вырыть в день 2 сажени
4 вершка? [100]

840. Булочник на куличи к Пасхе истратил 78 пудов 5 фунтов муки. На
каждый кулич идет 3 фунта 4 лота муки. Сколько испек он куличей? [1000]

841. На копейку можно купить 64 булавки. Сколько булавок можно купить на
156 руб. 25 коп.? [Миллион]

842. У меня 7 лошадей и 24 курицы. Лошадям даю я по гарнцу овса в день,
курам по гарнцу в неделю. Припас я для них овса, и через 7 недель у меня
остался только 1 гарнец. Сколько я припас овса? [8 четвертей]

843. 27 рабочих в 16 дней вырыли мне прудок. Сколько рабочих нужно,
чтобы вырыть такой же прудок в 12 дней? [36]

844. 24 плотника в 24 дня выстроили дом. За сколько времени выстроят
такой же дом 18 плотников? [32]

845. Куплено 2 куска сукна. В обоих вместе 100 аршин. Один из них на 28
аршин длиннее и на 63 руб. дороже другого. Сколько стоит каждый? [81
руб.; 144 руб.]

846. В течение февраля горело у меня 5 ламп, по 6 часов в день. Фунт
керосину выгорает в 14 часов. На сколько выгорало у меня керосину, если
пуд его стоит 2 руб.? [На 3 руб.]

847. Заводчик продал 23 лошади по 87 руб. и 43 лошади по 93 руб. На
вырученные деньги он купил 125 десятин земли. Почем десятина? [48 руб.]

848. Из 25 пудов меди сделано 3 колокола. В первом столько фунтов,
сколько во втором лотов и в третьем золотников. Вес? [24 пуда; 30
фунтов; 10 фунтов]

849. Лавочник покупает чай по 1 руб. 55 коп. фунт и продает его по 1
руб. 80 коп. На барыш он содержит в городе сына, что обходится ему по 60
коп. в день. Сколько фунтов продает он в месяц? [72]

650. Виноторговец купил за 300 руб. бочонок с вином в 240 бутылок.
Бутылки он покупает по 18 коп. за дюжину. Ярлыки на бутылки — по 1 коп.
штука. 15 бутылок разбилось, остальные он продал и получил 54 руб.
барыша. Почем продавал он бутылку? [1 руб. 60 коп.]

851. Переднее колесо делает 19 оборотов, пока заднее делает их 13.
Заднее колесо сделало 624 оборота. Сколько сделало переднее? [912]

852. 20 землекопов починили 4 версты дороги. Их было 2 артели. В первой
было двумя землекопами больше, чем во второй, и она починила двумя
саженями больше, чем вторая. Сколько сажень починил каждый работник
первой и второй артели? [91; 111]

853. Нужно переписать 70 страниц. Один писец может переписать их в 2
недели, другой в 10 дней, третий в неделю, четвертый в 3&#189; дня,
пятый в 2&#189; дня. Во сколько времени перепишут они рукопись впятером?
[В 1 день]

854. 8 монахинь, работая по 6 часов в день, в 26 дней вышили архиерею
ковер. Во сколько времени могут вышить такой же ковер 13 монахинь,
работая по 4 часа в день? [В 24 дня]

855. Пряничник в год употребил на пряники 78 пудов 5 фунтов муки. На
пряник идет лот муки. Сколько испек он пряников? [100000]

856. Во сколько времени можно проехать 63 версты, проезжая в минуту по
52 сажени 1 аршину 8 вершков? [10 часов]

857. Перед образом горит неугасимая лампада. Сколько будет стоить масло
на нее в 1892 году, если в ней золотник масла выгорает в 1 час 1 минуту,
а фунт масла стоит 40 коп.? [36 руб.]

858. На 161 ученика за зиму вышло 529 тетрадей. Сколько нужно припасти
тетрадей на 63 ученика? [207]

859. Мальчик прочел по 4 раза «Верую» (149 слов), «Отче наш» (52),
«Достойно» (30), «Богородицу» (23) и «Пресвятую Троицу» (21). Говорит он
по 100 слов в минуту. Сколько минут он читал? [11]

860. За 4 фунта сахару, 5 фунтов кофе и 6 фунтов чаю заплачено 14 руб.
40 коп. Кофе вчетверо дороже сахара, чай втрое дороже кофе. Цены за
фунт? [15 коп.; 60 коп.; 1 руб. 80 коп.]

861. За 12 четвертей овса и 14 четвертей пшеницы заплачено 216 руб.
Пшеница втрое дороже овса. Сколько стоит четверть того и другого? [4; 12
руб.]

862. Я шести мальчикам роздал 282 пряника, каждому по 3 фунта и 5
пряников. Сколько пряников в фунте? [14]

863. Я в год издержал 10400 спичек, каждую неделю по 3 коробки и 20
спичек. Сколько спичек в коробке? [60]

864. Нитка длиною в 2 сажени 15 вершков весит золотник. Сколько аршин
ниток в клубке, весящем 1 фунт? [666]

865. Телеграфная проволока в 1 сажень 2 вершка весит фунт. Пуд такой
проволоки стоит 2 руб. Что будет стоить проволока в 1 версту? [24 руб.]

866. От Москвы до Петербурга 604 версты. Два поезда выехали одновременно
друг другу навстречу из Москвы и Петербурга и встретились через 8 часов.
Один поезд проезжает в час 5&#189; верстами больше, чем другой. Сколько
верст в час проезжает тот и другой? [35; 40&#189;]

867. От Москвы до Тамбова 450 верст. Выехали одновременно из Москвы
почтовый, а из Тамбова товарный поезда друг другу навстречу. Второй мог
бы пройти весь путь в 18 часов, первый — вдвое скорее. Через сколько
часов они встретятся? [Через 6 часов]

868. Лист бумаги весит золотник. На скольких подводах можно привезти
1000 стоп бумаги, если на подводу класть по 25 пудов? [На 5]

869. Лавочник продал 26 аршин ситца по 26 коп., 18 по 18, 16 по 16, 12
по 12 и 11 по 11 и на вырученные деньги купил плиса по 39 коп. Сколько
аршин? [39]

870. Отцу 32 года, сыну — 5, дочери — 3. Через сколько лет года дочери и
сына, вместе взятые, будут равны летам отца? [24]

871. У отца 4 сына: 2, 4, 6 и 8-ми лет. Отцу 35 лет. Через сколько лет
сумма годов детей будет равна летам отца? [5]

872. Один работник проработал некоторое число дней и получал в день
столько копеек, сколько проработал дней. Другой проработал днем меньше
первого, но получал в день копейкою больше. Кто из них получил больше?
[Первый на 1 коп.]

873. Я купил имение и платил за каждую десятину столько рублей, сколько
в имении десятин. Брат мой купил двумя десятинами больше, но платил за
десятину двумя рублями меньше. Кто из нас заплатил больше? [Я, на 4
руб.]

874. Я купил столько коробок с мылом, сколько было кусков в коробке.
Сестра купила тремя коробками меньше, чем я, но в каждой было тремя
кусками больше, чем в купленных мною. У кого больше кусков? [У меня,
девятью]

875. Два мальчика играли в шашки. Через несколько минут на доске
оказалось пустых клеток втрое больше, чем занятых шашками, а у одного
мальчика двумя шашками больше, чем у другого. Сколько осталось у
каждого? [9; 7]

876. Отцу 30 лет, сыну — 4, дочери — 2. Через сколько лет года детей
составят половину лет отца? [6]

877. Я купил 27 голов сахару по 27 фунтов и 43 головы по 17 фунтов. На
сколько времени хватит этого сахару, если буду тратить по 1 фунту в
день? [На 4 года (без високосного дня)]

878. На школу, в коей 85 учеников, вышло в зиму 221 грифель. Сколько
нужно запасти грифелей на школу, в коей 60 учеников? [156]

879. Некто получает за рабочий день 1 руб. 40 коп. Сколько может он
тратить в день, если работает 280 дней в году и желает в год отложить
100 руб.? [80 коп.]

880. Некто работает 273 дня в году и тратит на себя в день 60 коп., а
откладывает в год 600 руб. Сколько он получает за рабочий день? [3 руб.]

881. Некто работает 273 дня в году и получает 2 руб. в день за работу.
Тратит же он на себя 40 коп. в день. Сколько откладывает он в год? [400
руб.]

882. Живописец написал портрет и получил за него 300 руб. Приходил он
писать 5 раз и каждый раз работал 1 час 15 минут. Сколько зарабатывал он
в минуту? [80 коп.]

883. В будущем (1892) году думаю провести в Петербурге столько минут,
сколько часов проведу в деревне. Сколько времени проведу я в Петербурге?
[6 дней]

884. Дед мой прожил 75 лет и из них прожил в городе столько часов,
сколько дней он прожил в деревне. Сколько времени он жил в городе? [3
года]

885. В первые 4 месяца 1891 года я проболел столько дней, сколько недель
я был здоров. Сколько дней я проболел? [15]

886. Матери и дочери вместе 32 года. Мать прожила столько месяцев,
сколько дочь недель. Сколько лет каждой? [26 лет; 6 лет]

887. Сапожник каждый день два раза посылает мальчика за водою, а колодец
за полверсты, и 15 раз в месяц за водкою, а кабак за 3/4 версты. Сколько
верст мальчик пробежит в год? [1000 верст]

888. Поезд в 1 час 9 минут проезжает 50 верст. Сколько проедет он в
сутки при 8 остановках, каждая в 7 минут 30 секунд? [1000 верст]

889. Матери 30 лет, а трем дочерям 9,10 и 11. Через сколько лет года
дочерей, сложенные вместе, превысят вдвое лета матери? [Через 30 лет]

890. Я трачу в день золотник мыла. Припас я себе на 3 года 37 кусков по
9 лотов. Сколько (на вес) нужно прикупить? [1 фунт]

891. Мне нужно переписать тетрадку. Я мог бы переписать ее в 2 дня,
Ефрем в 3 дня, а Семен в 6 дней. Во сколько времени перепишем мы ее
втроем? [В 1 день]

892. Сколько ударов пробили часы (бьющие половины одним ударом) в
течение февраля 1892 года? [5040 ударов]

893. Сколько минут в феврале простого года? [40 320 минут]

894. В июне я откладывал каждый день столько копеек, сколько единиц в
числе этого дня. В июле я все эти деньги истратил. Сколько я тратил в
день? [15 коп.]

895. Летом у меня целые сутки было открыто окно. В первый час влетел 1
комар, во второй 2, в третий 3 и т.д. Сколько комаров налетело в сутки?
[300]

896. Матери и дочери вместе 32 года. Мать прожила столько месяцев,
сколько дочь недель. Сколько лет каждой? [26; 6]

897. Вышел пароход из пристани и в первый час прошел 28 верст. Но так
как ветер был противный, он каждый час замедлял свой ход на 1 версту.
Сколько верст проехал он в 12 часов? [270]

898. Вершок материи весит золотник; 5 кусков этой материи весят 1 пуд и
стоят 168 руб. Сколько стоит аршин? [70 коп.]

899. От Москвы до Тамбова 450 верст. Из этих городов одновременно
выехали друг другу навстречу 2 путника. Первый проезжает 1 аршин, пока
второй проезжает 1 фут. Во скольких верстах от Москвы они встретятся?
[315]

900. Поползли друг другу навстречу из школы червяк, а из бани жук. Пока
червяк проползает дюйм, жук проползает вершок. На каком расстоянии от
школы они встретятся, если от школы до бани 33 сажени? [12 сажени]

901. В лавке было 240 фунтов чаю на 600 руб. Пришли три покупателя.
Первый купил 2/3 всего чая, второй 48 фунтов, третий — остальной чай.
Сколько заплатил третий? [80 руб.]

902. Серебряный крест весит 10 лотов. Чистого серебра в нем 8 лотов 1
золотник. Какой пробы серебро? [80-й]

903. Золотой крестик весит 2 лота. Чистого золота в нем 4 золотника 48
долей. Какой пробы золото? [72-й]

904. Я купил 400 аршин сукна за 700 руб. Почем должен я продавать аршин,
чтобы получить барыша 20 коп. на рубль? [По 2 руб. 10 коп.]

905. Некто в каждый будний день раздает нищим по 16 коп., а в каждое
воскресенье 96 коп. Сколько денег раздает он нищим в год? [100 руб.]

906. Иаков прожил 42 • 42 месяца, прежде чем переехать в Египет. Сколько
ему было лет, когда он явился к Фараону? [147]

907. Пешеход вышел в 10 часов утра и шел по 4&#189; версты в час. В 3
часа пополудни за ним в догоню поскакал верховой и нагнал его в 6 часов
вечера. Сколько верст проезжал в час верховой? [12]

908. От деревни до города 63 версты. Из деревни в 3 часа утра вышел
пешеход и шел по 3&#189; версты в час. Вслед за ним вышел из той же
деревни другой пешеход и, идя по 4&#189; версты в час, нагнал первого в
самом городе. Когда вышел второй пешеход? [В 7 часов утра]

909. Баба может выткать в день 5 аршин 7 вершов сукна. Во сколько недель
выткет она 261 аршин (в неделе 6 рабочих дней)? [8]

910. Отцу 54 года, а старшему сыну 29. Младший же сын родился, когда
отец был вдвое старше старшего сына. Сколько лет младшему? [4 года]

911. Я провел в Петербурге неделю, и оказалось, что каждая минута,
проведенная там, обошлась мне в копейку. Сколько издержал я в
Петербурге? [100 руб. 80 коп.]

912. Три артели землекопов починили 31 версту дороги. Первая починила
столько футов, сколько вторая аршин, а третья — сажень. Сколько починила
каждая? [3; 7; 21 верст]

913. Поденщик в год проработал 219 дней за 40 коп. в день. Остальные дни
он гулял и пропивал по 60 коп. в день. Сколько осталось ему на
пропитание? [0]

914. Некто купил кусок сукна, по 2 руб. 50 коп. аршин. Но 6 аршин у него
украли. Остальное сукно он продал по 3 руб. и вернул свой убыток.
Сколько было аршин в куске? [36]

915. Торговец купил сахару по 6 руб. пуд. Но 15 пудов сахару оказались
совершенно негодными. Однако, продав остальной сахар по 8 руб. пуд, он
не только вернул свой убыток, но получил 30 руб. барыша. Сколько сахару
было им куплено? [75 пудов]

916. В школе каждому ученику выдается в неделю по перу, а исписывает он
в день 4 страницы (в четвертушку). Исписали все ученики в зиму 9 стоп
бумаги. Сколько гроссов перьев вышло? [10 гроссов]

917. В школе каждому ученику выдается в неделю по перу. В 30 учебных
недель вышло всего 10 гроссов перьев. Сколько в школе было учеников?
[48]

918. Бамбук (китайский тростник) вырос в течение февраля на 4 сажени. На
сколько вырастал он в каждый час? [На 5 линий]

919. У меня 3 дня работали землекопы. В первый день работало 13
землекопов, и каждый починил по 18 саженей дороги. Затем каждый день
прибавлялось по землекопу, и каждый день каждый из них чинил на сажень
больше, чем накануне. Сколько они починили саженей? [800]

920. Я каждый месяц откладывал по 12 руб., а брат мой отложил в январе 1
руб., в феврале 3, в марте 5, — каждый месяц двумя рублями больше, чем в
предыдущий. У кого в конце года оказалось больше денег? [Поровну]

921. Ко мне приехали гости, все мужья с женами. Если бы 3 мужа оставили
своих жен дома, было бы мужчин вдвое более, чем женщин. Если бы 3 барыни
приехали без мужей, то наоборот. Сколько было гостей? [12]

922. Кабатчик за 200 руб. купил бочку водки в 42 ведра. Эту бочку он
разбавил водою, прибавляя по 3 ведра воды к 7 ведрам водки, и разлил в
5-ведерные бочонки, которые продал по 25 руб. Сколько барыша? [100 руб.]

923. Барышник купил 40 четвертей овса по 5 руб., примешал к нему (по 3
меры на четверть) плохого овса по 2 руб. и смешанный овес продал по 6
руб. Сколько барыша? [100 руб.]

924. Чиновника спросили, как велико его жалованье. Он отвечал, что
получает каждый месяц по бумажке каждого сорта (1, 3, 5, 10, 25, 100).
Сколько он получает в год? [1728 руб.]

925. Два лавочника начали торговлю, один с 300, другой с 3000 руб. Но
первый каждый год наживал по 100 руб., второй ежегодно проживал по 125
руб. Через сколько лет капиталы их сравняются, и по сколько тогда будет
у каждого? [12 лет; по 1500 руб.]

926. Охотник осенью убил зайца, продал его шкурку за 10 коп. и на эти
деньги купил 10 зарядов. Этими зарядами, подумал он, я убью 10 зайцев,
продам их шкурки, опять куплю пороху и т.д. В конце каждого месяца буду
продавать, а целый месяц буду стрелять. Если бы эта штука ему удалась,
сколько бы он заработал в 7 зимних месяцев? [Миллион рублей]

927. В соборе во время Всенощной горело 7 паникадил по 24 свечи. Всякая
свеча стоит рубль и сгорает в сутки. Всенощная продолжалась 5 часов. На
сколько сгорело свечей? [35 руб.]

928. Виноторговец купил 3 сороковых бочки вина по 5 руб. ведро, разбавил
его водою, перелил в 9-ведерные бочонки и продавал вино по 5 руб. ведро.
Получил он 120 руб. барыша. Сколько воды прилил он к каждому бочонку?
[1&#189; ведра]

929. Дед втрое старше старшего внука и вчетверо старше младшего. Обоим
внукам вместе 49 лет. Сколько лет деду? [84]

930. Я на 21 руб. 25 коп. прокормил в течете пяти дней 17 человек.
Сколько нужно денег, чтобы прокормить 19 человек в течение 7 дней? [33
руб. 25 коп.]

931. Пароход прошел 100 верст в 4 часа 10 минут. Во сколько времени
пройдет он 576 верст? [В сутки]

932. От Петербурга до Москвы 604 версты. Из Петербурга в 7 часов утра
вышел поезд и проезжает по 39 верст в час. В 1 час пополудни к нему
навстречу из Москвы вышел поезд, проезжающий по 35 верст в час. Когда
поезда встретятся? [В 6 часов вечера]

933. Ткачу было заказано соткать в 16 дней 300 аршин холста. 6 дней он
работал один, по 12 аршин 8 вершков в день, а затем пригласил себе на
помощь другого ткача, — и работа поспела к сроку. Сколько аршин в день
вытыкал второй ткач? [10]

934. Богомолец был в Ниловой Пустыне 7 раз, каждый раз жил там по 7
недель и каждый раз ставил по 7 свечей. Только один раз он ошибся и
поставил 6. Свечей идет на фунт 12. Сколько весят все поставленные им
свечи? [5 пудов]

935. Я купил 30 десятин земли за 3000 руб. Но тут был лес по 113 руб.
десятина и пахота по 83 руб. десятина. Сколько того и другого? [17; 13
десятин]

936. Мальчика спросили, сколько ему лет? Он отвечал: «Я втрое старше
брата и втрое моложе отца; отец на 40 лет старше брата». Сколько лет
мальчику? [15]

937. Я купил лошадь. Если заплачу за нее 3-рублевыми бумажками, придется
выдать 8-ю бумажками больше, чем если я заплачу 5-рублевыми. Сколько
стоит лошадь? [60 руб.]

938. В церкви горит неугасимая лампада, в которой выгорает в час по
золотнику масла. Купец пожертвовал на эту лампаду бочонок масла, и его
хватило на 1 год и 5 недель. Сколько масла было в бочонке? [2 пуда 20
фунтов]

939. Чиновник каждый месяц откладывал из своего жалованья 31 руб. 25
коп. и наконец купил на отложенные деньги 48 десятин по 48 руб. и 29
десятин по 24 руб. Сколько лет он откладывал? [8]

940. Сколько весят 8 саженей проволоки, если 1 дюйм весит 1 золотник? [7
фунтов]

941. Вершок телеграфной проволоки весит лот. На сколько верст хватит 75
пудов? [4]

942. Книгу в 40 листов печатают в 1200 экземплярах. Сколько нужно стоп
бумаги? [100]

943. Книгу в 24 листа напечатали, истратив 30 стоп бумаги. Сколько
экземпляров? [600]

944. Деда спросили, сколько лет его внуку. Дед отвечал, что мальчик
прожил столько будних дней, сколько мать его прожила воскресений,
столько суток, сколько отец прожил недель, и столько месяцев, сколько
бабушка его прожила лет. Всем им без мальчика 100 лет. Сколько лет
мальчику? [4]

945. В колоколе 770 пудов. В нем столько лотов меди, сколько золотников
олова и долей серебра. Сколько пудов каждого металла? [576; 192; 2]

946. Две артели землекопов починили 1 версту дороги. Первая починила
столько аршин, сколько вторая футов. Сколько саженей починила каждая?
350 саженей; 150 саженей]

Задачи на вычисление поверхностей и объемов

947. Я разбил десятину на прямоугольные огороды длиною в 20 саженей,
шириною в 15 саженей. Сколько вышло огородов? И

948. Десятину земли я разбил на прямоугольные огороды длиною в 16
саженей, шириною в 10 саженей. Сколько вышло огородов? [15]

949. Десятину земли я разбил на прямоугольные огороды длиною в 12
саженей 1 аршин 8 вершков, шириною в 12 саженей. Сколько вышло огородов?
[16]

950. Я хочу удобрить 1 десятину так, чтобы на каждую квадратную сажень
пришлось по пуду навоза. Сколько для этого нужно возов в 32 пуда? [75]

951. У меня огород, длиною в 28 саженей, шириною в 20. Вывез я на него
35 возов навоза по 16 пудов. Сколько нужно таких возов, чтобы столь же
густо удобрить десятину? [150]

952. Пол в комнате длиною в 15 аршин, шириною в 8 устлали коврами.
Каждый ковер длиною в 4 аршин, шириною в 2 аршина 8 вершков. Сколько
пошло ковров? [12]

953. Хочу обить сукном пол квадратной комнаты, сторона коей — 12 аршин.
Сукно — шириною в 1 аршин 8 вершков. Сколько нужно купить аршин? [96]

954. Комната имеет в длину 5 саженей, в ширину — 3. Пол я устлал
рогожками длиною в 5 аршин, шириною в 3. Сколько пошло рогожек? [9]

955. Потолок комнаты длиною в 10 аршин, шириною в 8 я оклеил бумагою.
Каждый лист имеет в длину 10 вершков, в ширину — 8. Сколько пошло
листов? [256]

956. Пол в комнате длиною в 12 аршин, шириною в 7 я обтянул сукном
шириною в 2 аршин (аршин стоит 2 руб. 50 коп.). Сколько это стоит? [105
руб.]

957. В комнате длиною в 9 аршин, шириною в 6 сделан паркетный пол.
Каждая дощечка — квадратный фут. Сколько пошло дощечек? [294]

958. Дом мой имеет в длину 12 саженей, в ширину 5. Двор втрое больше,
чем дом, сад втрое больше двора, огород втрое больше сада. Какое
пространство занимает вся усадьба? [1 десятина]

959. У меня под огородом 1 десятина. В нем картофель занимает в 7 раз
больше места, чем капуста, капуста в 7 раз больше, чем горох, горох в 7
раз больше, чем лук, а именно лук занимает 1 грядку шириною в 2 аршина.
Как длинна эта грядка? [9 саженей]

960. Лист бумаги имеет длины 12 вершков, ширины 8. Сколько стоп такой
бумаги нужно, чтобы покрыть десятину? [120]

961. Квадратный участок земли я обошел в 12 минут, проходя по 40 саженей
в минуту. Сколько в нем десятин? [6]

962. Стену длиною в 28 аршин, вышиною в 8 аршин нужно выкрасить. В ней 4
окна шириною в 2 аршина, вышиною в 3. За окраску квадратной сажени берут
54 коп. Что будет стоить окраска? [12 руб.]

963. У меня прямоугольная полоса земли. Длина ее в 6 раз больше ширины.
Кругом по меже 280 саженей. Сколько у меня земли? [1 десятина]

964. У меня прямоугольный участок леса. Чтобы обойти его кругом, нужно
пройти 4 версты. Длина на 200 саженей больше ширины. Сколько в нем
десятин? [100]

965. Комната имеет в длину 5 саженей, в ширину 28 футов. Сколько в полу
квадратных аршин? [180]

966. Площадь имеет в длину 75 аршин, в ширину 140 футов. Сколько в ней
квадратных саженей? [500]

967. Пол в комнате длиною в 8 аршин, шириною в 7 аршин 8 вершков
выкрасили за 6 руб. Что будет стоить выкрасить пол в комнате длиною в 12
аршин 8 вершков, шириною в 12 аршин? [15 руб.]

968. Сколько досок длиною в 6 аршин, шириною в 6 вершков нужно, чтобы
замостить пол в квадратной комнате, коей сторона — 12 аршин? [64]

969. Сколько листов бумаги длиною в 12 вершков, шириною в 8 вершков
нужно, чтобы покрыть пол квадратной комнаты, сторона коей 12 аршин?
[384]

970. У меня прямоугольная десятина, шириною в 40 саженей. Сколько борозд
могу я пропахать в этой ширине на расстоянии 1 аршин 8 вершков одна от
другой? [80]

971. Церковь имеет длину 49 футов, в ширину 35. На 3 квадратных аршинах
могут удобно стоять 5 человек. Сколько человек вмещает церковь? [525]

972. Прямоугольное поле имеет в длину 1 версту, в ширину версту без 20
саженей. Сколько в нем десятин? [100]

973. На одеяло длиною в 3 аршина, шириною в 2 пошло 12 фунтов шерсти.
Сколько фунтов шерсти пойдет на одеяло длиною в 2 аршина, шириною в 1
аршин 8 вершков? [6]

974. На поливку огорода длиною в 35, шириною в 12 саженей пошло 14 бочек
воды. Сколько бочек нужно, чтобы полить огород длиною в 25 саженей,
шириною в 24? [20]

975. Пол в комнате длиною в 8 аршин, шириною в б я обтянул ковром, и это
обошлось мне в 60 руб. Что будет стоить обтянуть таким же ковром пол в
комнате длиною в 9 аршин, шириною в 8? [90 руб.]

976. Кусок обоев имеет в длину 12 аршин, в ширину 12 вершков. Сколько
таких кусков нужно, чтобы оклеить стену, вышиною в 4 аршина 8 вершков,
длиною в 12 аршин? [6]

977. Кусок обоев имеет в длину 12 аршин, в ширину 1 аршин 4 вершка.
Сколько таких кусков нужно, чтобы оклеить стену длиною в 13 аршин,
вышиною в 6, если в этой стене 3 окна, каждое вышиною в 3 аршина,
шириною в 2? [4]

978. В комнате длиною в 12 аршин, шириною в 7 аршин 8 вершков я выкрасил
пол, и это обошлось мне в 5 руб. Что будет стоить выкрасить пол в
комнате длиною в 9 аршин, шириною в 8? [4 руб.]

979. На обивку пола в комнате идет 80 аршин сукна шириною в 1 аршин 4
вершка. Сколько пошло бы сукна шириною в 2 аршина? [50] аршин

980. Землекопы вырыли мне пруд длиною в 12 саженей, шириною в 7,
глубиною в 2. За выемку 1 кубической сажени они берут 75 коп. Сколько
стоит эта работа? [126 руб.]

981. Землекопы вырыли мне пруд длиною в б саженей, шириною в 4 сажени,
глубиною в 5 аршин. За выемку 1 кубической сажени они берут 1 руб. 25
коп. Сколько стоит работа? [50 руб.]

982. Сарай вышиною в 2 сажени, шириною в 3, длиною в 7 наполнен сеном. В
кубической сажени сена — 40 пудов. Сколько пудов сена в сарае? [1680]

983. Мера нашего кирпича: 6, 3 и 1&#189; вершка. Сколько кирпичей нужно,
чтобы сложить кубик, коего ребро 12 вершков? [64]

984. Прямоугольный чан имеет в длину 5 футов, в ширину 2 фута 1 дюйм, в
глубину 1 фут 8 дюймов (в ведре 750 куб. дюймов). Сколько сороковых
бочек воды вмещает чан? [1]

985. Наша классная комната имеет в длину 12 аршин, в ширину 12 аршин и в
вышину 3 аршина 12 вершков. Сколько она вмещает кубических саженей
воздуха? [20]

986. Кусок мыла имеет в длину 3 дюйма, в ширину 2 дюйма, в вышину — 1
дюйм. Сколько таких кусков поместится в кубический ящик, коего ребро
(внутри) — 1 фут? [288]

987. Нужно вырыть пруд длиною в 12 саженей, шириною в 6 саженей,
глубиною в 2 сажени. Одна артель землекопов берется вырыть его в 18
дней, другая в 12, третья в 9. Во сколько времени выроют пруд эти 3
артели, работая вместе? [В 4 дня]

988. Сколько кирпичей (6, 3, 1&#189; вершков) нужно, чтобы сложить
квадратный столб, вышина коего 3 аршина, сторона — 15 вершков? [400]

989. Сколько нужно кирпичей 6, 3, 1&#189; вершков), чтобы сложить 25
квадратных столбов, вышина которых 3 аршина 12 вершков, сторона — 18
вершков? [18000]

990. Сколько нужно кубических саженей песка, чтобы насыпать его на
высоту 1 аршина на прямоугольную площадку в 30 &#215; 40 саженей? [400]

991. Прямоугольная площадка имеет в длину 16 саженей, в ширину 12.
Сколько нужно кубических саженей песка, чтобы насыпать его на эту
площадку на высоту 6 вершков? [24]

992. Площадка имеет в длину 8 саженей, в ширину 6. Сколько нужно
кубических саженей земли, чтобы повысить ее на 1 вершок? [1 сажень]

993. У меня сарай с сеном длиною в 4 сажени, вышиною в 1 сажень 1 аршин
8 вершков, шириною в 2 сажени 1 аршин 8 вершков (в куб. сажени сена — 40
пудов). Сколько пудов сена в сарае? [600]

994. Коробка с гроссом перьев имеет в длину 2 дюйма, в ширину 1&#189;, в
вышину 1 дюйм. Сколько гроссов перьев можно уложить в кубический ящик,
коего ребро (внутри) — 1 фут? [576]

995. 40 землекопов в 1 день сделали мне насыпь в 37 кубических саженей 1
кубический аршин. Сколько насыпал каждый? [25 кубических аршин]

996. Нужно прорыть сквозь гору тоннель длиною в 1 версту, шириною в 8
саженей, вышиною в 3 сажени. Во сколько времени пророют его 150 рабочих,
если каждый будет вынимать по 1 кубической сажени в 2 дня? [160 дней]

997. Землекопы рыли у меня канаву и в 1 день вынули 7 кубических саженей
без 1 кубического фута. Каждый вынул по 300 кубических футов. Сколько
было землекопов? [8]

998. У меня сарай с сеном длиною в 10 саженей, шириною в 4 сажени,
вышиною в 2 сажени 12 вершков. Сколько в нем кубических саженей сена?
[90]

999. В комнате длиною в 7 аршин, шириной в 5 нужно сделать паркетный пол
из квадратных дощечек, сторона которых — 4 вершка. Сколько пойдет
дощечек? [560]

1000. Ковер длиною в 3 аршина, шириною в 2 аршина 8 вершков стоит 15
руб. Что будет стоить ковер того же качества длиною в 10 аршин, шириною
в б аршин? [120 руб.]

1001. Мне вырыли пруд длиною в 8 саженей, шириною в 4 сажени, глубиною в
1 сажень 1 аршин 8 вершков. За каждую вынутую кубическую сажень берут 1
руб. 50 коп. Сколько я заплатил? [72 руб.]










*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK 1001 ЗАДАЧА ДЛЯ УМСТВЕННОГО СЧЕТА ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.



The Project Gutenberg eBook of Über die Geometrie der alten Aegypter.
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Über die Geometrie der alten Aegypter.

Author: Emil Weyr

Release date: March 13, 2008 [eBook #24817]

Language: German



*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ÜBER DIE GEOMETRIE DER ALTEN AEGYPTER. ***





                                 ÜBER DIE

                       GEOMETRIE DER ALTEN ÆGYPTER

                            ------------------

                                 VORTRAG

                             GEHALTEN IN DER

     FEIERLICHEN SITZUNG DER KAISERLICHEN AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN

                                    AM

                          XXIX. MAI MDCCCLXXXIV

                                   VON

                              DR. EMIL WEYR

    WIRKLICHEM MITGLIEDE DER KAISERLICHEN AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN.

                            ------------------

                                   WIEN

                 AUS DER K. K. HOF- UND STAATSDRUCKEREI.

                  IN COMMISSION BEI KARL GEROLD'S SOHN,

        BUCHHÄNDLER DER KAISERLICHEN AKADEMIE DER WISSENSCHAFTEN.

                                   1884






Möge mir gestattet sein, bei dem heutigen feierlichen Anlasse ein Bild zu
entrollen, welches in grossen Strichen die allgemeinen Umrisse des
Zustandes der geometrischen Wissenschaften bei den alten Aegyptern zur
Darstellung bringen soll; und möge dasselbe Wohlwollen, das, gepaart mit
einer althergebrachten Sitte, mich heute auf diesen eben so ehrenvollen
als schwierigen Platz gestellt, auch bei der Beurtheilung der folgenden
bescheidenen, weil schwachen Kräften entspringenden Leistung obwalten!

So wie der Anfang aller menschlichen Kenntnisse, so ist auch der Ursprung
der Geometrie in grauestes Alterthum zu versetzen, er ist zu suchen in
jenen der Zeit nach unangebbaren Perioden der menschlichen Entwicklung, in
welchen das erste Erwachen des Selbstbewusstseins zu finden wäre. Sind
doch manche geometrische Anschauungen auch dem Thiere eigen; so jene der
geraden Verbindungslinie zweier Punkte als der kürzesten Entfernung; jene
des Mehr und Weniger bei Quantitäten der Entfernungen, Höhen, Neigungen,
und so werden auch manche abstractere Raumanschauungen dem Menschen in
seinen ersten Entwicklungsperioden eigen geworden sein, Anschauungen,
welche durch die Möglichkeit und auf Grund der sprachlichen Bezeichnung
jene Stabilität erhielten, die sie befähigte, als erste Fundamente der
geometrischen Kenntnisse zunächst, und der Geometrie als Wissenschaft
später aufzutreten.

Geometrisches Denken entstand zu den verschiedensten Zeiten, an den
verschiedensten Orten. Denn überall, wo der menschliche Geist sich zu
entwickeln begann, und das menschliche Denken jene Höhe erreichte, auf
welcher Abstractionen entstehen, bildeten sich die grundlegenden
Raumbegriffe; der des Punktes, der geraden und krummen Linien, der ebenen
und krummen Flächen. Denn überall in der Natur boten sich dem erwachenden
Menschen Repräsentanten dieser Begriffe in grösserer oder geringerer
Genauigkeit dar. Während der Anblick der auf- und untergehenden Sonne,
sowie des vollen Mondes in südlichen Gegenden fast täglich das Bild der
»vollkommensten«, der »schönsten« Linie, der Kreislinie vorführte,
stellten sich die zahllosen Sterne des Abends dem Auge als glänzende
Punkte dar, welche in ihren mannigfaltigen gegenseitigen
Lagenverhältnissen die Phantasie des Menschen bei der, von ihm beliebten
Eintheilung des Himmels in Sternbilder zur Herstellung so mancher geraden
und krummen Linien verleiten mochten. Und selbst in seiner nächsten
Umgebung fand der beobachtende Mensch geometrische Anklänge; das Gewebe
der Spinne mit seinen kreisrunden und radialen Fäden, die sechseckige
Bienenzelle, die beim Fallen eines Körpers in ruhendes Wasser entstehenden
concentrischen Wellenringe, und wie vieles Andere musste, wenn auch nach
und nach, so doch mit zwingender Nothwendigkeit den Menschen zur
Beobachtung gesetzmässiger geometrischer Formen führen.

Als Mutterland der Mathematik im Allgemeinen, und der Geometrie im
Besonderen wird Aegypten angeführt; doch ist die Zeit längst vorbei, wo
man sich Aegypten als einzigen Ursprungsort dieser Wissenschaften dachte,
vielmehr muss als feststehend angenommen werden, dass jedes Volk in seinem
Entwicklungsgange geometrische Anschauungen sich anzueignen schon durch
praktische Bedürfnisse gezwungen war. Die Höhe, zu welcher sich die
einzelnen Völker in ihren mathematischen Speculationen emporzuschwingen
vermochten, hing von der Richtung des Bildungsganges, von dem Maasse des
Bedürfnisses und nicht in letzter Reihe von dem Einflüsse religiöser
Verhältnisse ab.

Und so mag sich zunächst jene Naturgeometrie entwickelt haben, welche
allen Völkern zugesprochen werden muss, und auf deren Vorhandensein, weil
auf die Anwendungen ihrer freilich einfachsten Principien, Ueberreste von
Bauten überall dort hinweisen, wo wir in der Lage sind, solche beobachten
zu können. Die Pellasger, die vorhellenischen Ureinwohner Griechenlands,
mussten lange vor Entstehung der Philosophie geometrische Kenntnisse in
dem Maasse besessen haben, wie sie zur Aufführung von Wasserbauten,
Dämmen, Canälen und Burgen, von denen man jetzt noch Spuren findet,
nothwendig waren.

Verfolgt man die Entwicklung der Geometrie zu ihren Quellen aufwärts, so
dürfen wir nicht überrascht sein, dass man bei dem uns bekannten ältesten
Culturvolke, bei den Aegyptern, am weitesten vorzudringen vermag, und zwar
an der Hand der indirecten wie der directen Nachrichten, welche uns über
diesen Gegenstand zugekommen sind. Leider jedoch sind die Ersteren ihrem
Inhalte und die Letzteren ihrer Zahl nach nur spärliche zu nennen.

Zahlreich sind wohl die Stellen in griechischen Philosophen und
Geschichtschreibern, welche Bezug haben auf aegyptische Geometrie, es
lässt sich jedoch nicht verkennen, dass oft die Späteren auf Frühere sich
stützen, und wir es möglicherweise mit einer einzigen, durch Jahrhunderte
fortgeführten Nachricht zu thun haben.

Durch *Herodot*, welcher um die Mitte des fünften vorchristlichen
Jahrhunderts (460) Aegypten bereiste, erfahren wir(1), dass die Geometrie
von Aegypten nach Griechenland verpflanzt worden sei. Etwas später (393
v. Chr.) berichtet *Isokrates* die Thatsache(2), dass die Aegypter »die
Aelteren (unter ihren Priestern) über die wichtigsten Angelegenheiten
setzten, dagegen die Jüngeren beredeten, mit Hintansetzung des Vergnügens,
sich mit Astronomie, Rechenkunst und Geometrie zu beschäftigen«.

In *Platon*'s _Phädrus_ sagt *Sokrates*: »Ich habe vernommen, zu Naukratis
in Aegypten sei einer der dortigen alten Götter gewesen, dem auch der
Vogel geheiligt ist, den sie Isis nennen, während der Gott selbst den
Namen Teuth führt; dieser habe zuerst Zahlenlehre und Rechenkunst erfunden
und Geometrie und Astronomie«(3), und einen directen Hinweis finden wir
bei *Aristoteles*, welcher in seiner _Metaphysik_ sagt:(4) »Daher
entstanden auch in Aegypten die mathematischen Wissenschaften, denn hier
war den Priestern die dazu nöthige Müsse vergönnt.«

Uebrigens schrieben sich die Aegypter neben der Erfindung der
Buchstabenschrift auch jene der meisten Wissenschaften und Künste zu,
worüber *Diodor*(5), welcher etwa 70 Jahre v. Chr. G. Aegypten bereiste,
bemerkt: »Die Aegypter behaupten, von ihnen sei die Erfindung der
Buchstabenschrift und die Beobachtung der Gestirne ausgegangen, ebenso
seien von ihnen die Theoreme der Geometrie und die meisten Wissenschaften
und Künste erfunden worden.«

Neben diesen ganz allgemein gehaltenen Angaben sind hauptsächlich
diejenigen Berichte zu erwähnen, welche sich auf die Art der
wissenschaftlichen Leistungen der Aegypter beziehen.

Da sagt zunächst *Herodot*(6) in Hinsicht auf die unter dem Könige
*Sesostris* durchgeführte Ländereintheilung: »Auch sagten sie, dass dieser
König das Land unter alle Aegypter so vertheilt habe, dass er jedem ein
gleich grosses Viereck gegeben, und von diesem seine Einkünfte bezogen
habe, indem er eine jährlich zu entrichtende Steuer auflegte. Wem aber der
Fluss (Nil) von seinem Theile etwas wegriss, der musste zu ihm kommen und
das Geschehene anzeigen; er schickte dann die Aufseher, die auszumessen
hatten, um wie viel das Landstück kleiner geworden war, damit der Inhaber
von dem übrigen nach Verhältniss der aufgelegten Abgaben steure. Hieraus
erscheint mir die Geometrie entstanden zu sein, die von da nach Hellas
kam.«

Die, *Herodot*, dem Vater der Geschichtsschreibung folgenden
Berichterstatter hielten sich nun, vielleicht erklärlicherweise,
vorzüglich an den einen, die Nilüberschwemmungen betreffenden Theil obiger
Nachricht, und wurde, gewiss Unberechtigtermassen der Nil als der
unmittelbare Anstoss für alle geometrischen Arbeiten der Aegypter
hingestellt. Und doch scheint es uns viel näherliegend, die einerseits
behufs der Steuerbemessung und Controle, anderseits wegen der aus den
Veränderungen im Besitzstande sich nothwendig ergebenden
Flächenfestsetzungen als den Hauptbeweggrund jener Vermessungen zu
erkennen, wobei die gesammelten Erfahrungen gewiss auch bei der
Beurtheilung der unzweifelhaft nach den periodisch eintretenden
Nilüberschwemmungen vorgekommenen Terrainveränderungen mit Vortheil
benutzt worden sein mögen.

Unverkennbar ist der Zug nach Aufbauschung und Ausschmückung des, jene
Nilüberschwemmungen betreffenden Theiles des *Herodot*'schen Berichtes,
wenn man die Aufzeichnungen späterer Gewährsmänner näher betrachtet.

Zunächst finden wir bei *Heron* dem Aelteren die folgende diesbezügliche
Stelle(7): »Die früheste Geometrie beschäftigte sich, wie uns die alte
Ueberlieferung lehrt, mit der Messung und Vertheilung der Ländereien,
woher sie Feldmessung genannt wurde. Der Gedanke einer Messung nämlich
ward den Aegyptern an die Hand gegeben durch die Ueberschwemmungen des
Nil. Denn viele Grundstücke, die vor der Flussschwelle offen dalagen,
verschwanden beim Steigen des Flusses und kamen erst nach dem Sinken
desselben zum Vorschein, und es war nicht immer möglich, über die
Identität derselben zu entscheiden. Dadurch kamen die Aegypter auf den
Gedanken einer solchen Messung des vom Nil blossgelegten Landes.«

Weiter finden wir bei *Diodor*(8) einen Ausspruch, durch welchen wir
übrigens auch über andere wissenschaftliche Leistungen der Aegypter
belehrt werden; *Diodor* sagt: »Die Priester lehren ihre Söhne zweierlei
Schrift, die sogenannte heilige, und die, welche man gewöhnlich lernt. Mit
Geometrie und Arithmetik beschäftigen sie sich eifrig. Denn indem der
Fluss jährlich das Land vielfach verändert, veranlasst er viele und
mannigfache Streitigkeiten über die Grenzen zwischen den Nachbarn; diese
können nun nicht leicht ausgeglichen werden, wenn nicht ein Geometer den
wahren Sachverhalt durch directe Messung ermittelt. Die Arithmetik dient
ihnen in Haushaltungsangelegenheiten und bei den Lehrsätzen der Geometrie;
auch ist sie denen von nicht geringem Vortheile, die sich mit Sternkunde
beschäftigen. Denn wenn bei irgend einem Volke die Stellungen und
Bewegungen der Gestirne sorgfältig beobachtet worden sind, so ist es bei
den Aegyptern geschehen; sie verwahren Aufzeichnungen der einzelnen
Beobachtungen seit einer unglaublich langen Beihe von Jahren, da bei ihnen
seit alten Zeiten her die grösste Sorgfalt hierauf verwendet worden ist.
Die Bewegungen und Umlaufszeiten sowie die Stillstände der Planeten, auch
den Einfluss eines jeden auf die Entstehung lebender Wesen und alle ihre
guten und schädlichen Einwirkungen haben sie sehr sorgfältig beobachtet.«

Am innigsten verknüpft erscheint die Geometrie der Aegypter mit den
Ueberschwemmungen des Nil bei *Strabon*(9); welcher bemerkt, »dass es
einer sorgfältigen und bis auf das Genaueste gehenden Eintheilung
bedurfte, wegen der beständigen Verwüstung der Grenzen, die der Nil bei
seinen Ueberschwemmungen veranlasst, indem er Land wegnimmt und zusetzt,
und die Gestalt verändert, und die anderen Zeichen unkenntlich macht,
wodurch das fremde und eigene Besitzthum unterschieden wird. Man müsse
daher immer und immer wieder messen. Hieraus soll die Geometrie entstanden
sein.«

Den gesellschaftlichen Einrichtungen der Aegypter entsprechend, muss als
feststehend angenommen werden, dass sich eine Kaste, nach eben Gehörtem
die der Priester, mit dem wissenschaftlichen Theile der Geometrie
beschäftigte, während eine andere, die der Feldmesser, die von den
Ersteren aufgestellten und sorgsam gehüteten geometrischen Principien
praktisch zur Anwendung brachte. Dabei wurden, wie wir später sehen
werden, die Geheimnisse der Priester, insoweit sie geometrische Wahrheiten
und Berechnungsregeln betrafen, möglicherweise nur insoweit enthüllt, dass
bei deren Verwendung nur annäherungsweise richtige Resultate zum Vorschein
kamen.

Wohl sind einige Schriftsteller so weit gegangen, dass sie, die
unläugbaren Uebertreibungen des Zusammenhanges zwischen den
Nilüberschwemmungen und der ägyptischen Geometrie im Auge behaltend, die
Existenz der letzteren einfach negirten, und alle die citirten Aussprüche
in das Gebiet der Fabel verwiesen.

Was macht man jedoch dann mit den wohlbeglaubigten Nachrichten über die
Reisen, welche hervorragende griechische Philosophen nach Aegypten
unternahmen, oft jahrelang dort verweilend, um sich in die Geheimnisse
aegyptischer Priester einweihen und mit deren geometrischem Wissen
vertraut machen zu lassen?

*Eudemus von Rhodos*(10), einer der ältesten Peripatetiker, schrieb eine
Geschichte der Mathematik, aus welcher uns durch *Proklos Diadochus*(11),
einen Philosophen des fünften nachchristlichen Jahrhunderts, ein
Bruchstück erhalten ist, welches sozusagen das einzige Mittel bildet, das
uns einen Einblick in die geometrischen Errungenschaften der Griechen in
den ersten dritthalb Jahrhunderten nach *Thales* gewährt. Hierin heisst es
unter Anderem: »*Thales*, der nach Aegypten ging, brachte zuerst die
Geometrie nach Hellas hinüber und Vieles entdeckte er selbst, von Vielem
aber überlieferte er die Anfänge seinen Nachfolgern; das Eine machte er
allgemeiner, das Andere mehr sinnlich fassbar.« Hundert Jahre nach dem
Tode des *Pythagoras* berichtet der Redner *Isokrates*(12): »Man könnte,
wenn man nicht eilen wollte, viel Bewunderungswürdiges von der Heiligkeit
aegyptischer Priester anführen, welche ich weder allein noch zuerst
erkannt habe, sondern viele der jetzt Lebenden und der Früheren, unter
denen auch *Pythagoras* der Samier ist, der nach Aegypten kam und ihr
Schüler wurde und die fremde Philosophie zuerst zu den Griechen
verpflanzte.«

Während der Aufenthalt des *Pythagoras* in Aegypten unter Anderen auch
noch von *Strabon*(13) und *Antiphon*(14) bestätiget wird, nennt uns
*Diodor*(15) eine ganze Reihe von Namen, indem er sagt; »Die aegyptischen
Priester nennen unter den Fremden, welche nach den Verzeichnissen in den
heiligen Büchern vormals zu ihnen gekommen seien, den *Orpheus*,
*Musaios*, *Melampus* und *Daidalos*, nach diesen den Dichter *Homer*, den
Spartaner *Lykurgos*, ingleichen den Athener *Solon* und den Philosophen
*Platon*. Gekommen sei zu ihnen auch der Samier *Pythagoras* und der
Mathematiker *Eudoxos*, ingleichen *Demokritos von Abdera* und *Oinopides
von Chios*. Von allen diesen weisen sie noch Spuren auf, von den Einen
Bildnisse von den Anderen Orte und Gebäude, die nach ihnen benannt sind.
Aus der Vergleichung dessen, was jeder von ihnen in seinem Fache geleistet
hat, führen sie den Beweis, dass sie Dasjenige um desswillen sie von den
Hellenen bewundert werden, aus Aegypten entlehnt haben.« Aus diesen
Stellen geht mit Sicherheit hervor, dass viele Griechen nach Aegypten
zogen, um bei den dortigen Priestern Philosophie und Mathematik kennen zu
lernen, da wohl in den Berichten nur die hervorragenden Männer angeführt
wurden.

Der Milesier *Thales*, welcher erst in vorgerücktem Alter, und nachdem er
als Handelsmann früher gewiss schon mehrmals Aegypten besucht gehabt, sich
daselbst behufs seiner Studien zu längerem Aufenthalt niederlies, ist
merkwürdiger Weise in dem Berichte des Diodor nicht angeführt, und könnte
man wohl aus diesem Umstande umsomehr einen gewissen Grad von
Unglaublichkeit ableiten, als darin mythische Namen wie *Orpheus*,
*Daidalos* und *Homer* angeführt erscheinen. Diese letzteren konnten
jedoch sehr wohl dem im Ganzen und Grossen sonst richtigen Verzeichnisse
vom Berichterstatter eigenwillig beigefügt worden sein, um dadurch das
hohe Alter aegyptischer Wissenschaft in ein vorteilhaftes Licht zu setzen.

Abgesehen jedoch von aller Wahrscheinlichkeit oder Unwahrscheinlichkeit
für die Exactheit obiger Aussprüche in Bezug auf einzelne Namen, dürfte
jedenfalls das als unumstössliche Wahrheit gelten, dass die ägyptischen
Priester von den Griechen als in den Wissenschaften, insbesondere in der
Geometrie sehr bewandert gehalten wurden, und zwar in einem solchen
Maasse, dass eine Reihe hervorragender griechischer Philosophen es nicht
verschmähte, die, für damalige Verhältnisse nicht unbedeutende Reise nach
Aegypten zu unternehmen, ja oft jahrelang in diesem Lande mit unbekannter
Sprache und Schrift zu verweilen, um sich die Kenntnisse der Aegypter
anzueignen.

Stellt man nun zunächst die Frage nach Quantität und Qualität des
geometrischen Wissens, welches die Griechen von ihren Studienreisen mit
nach Hause brachten, so scheint dies, selbst vom Standpunkte der
unmittelbar nachpythagoräischen Geometrie, äusserst Weniges gewesen zu
sein.

*Thales* von Milet, einer der sieben griechischen Weltweisen, der
Begründer der ionischen Schule, *Thales*, welcher für das Jahr 585
v. Chr. G. eine, auch eingetroffene Sonnenfinsterniss vorherzusagen
wusste, soll, den uns von *Proklos* zugekommenen Berichten zufolge, in
Aegypten nicht viel mehr erfahren haben, als die Sätze über die Gleichheit
der Winkel an der Basis eines gleichschenkligen Dreieckes, die Gleichheit
der Scheitelwinkel am Durchschnitt zweier Geraden; er wusste ferner, wie
ein Dreieck durch eine Seite und die beiden anliegenden Winkel bestimmt
erscheint, diese Erörterung zur Messung der Entfernungen von Schiffen auf
dem Meere benützend, es war ihm bekannt, dass ein Kreis durch einen
Durchmesser halbirt wird,(16) und soll er die Höhe der Pyramiden aus der
Länge des Schattens gemessen haben, höchst wahrscheinlich in dem Momente,
wo die Schattenlänge eines senkrechten Stabes der Stablänge gleich
ist,(17) möglicherweise jedoch, wie *Plutarch*(18) berichtet, auch zu
einer beliebigen Tageszeit. Auch wird ihm von *Pamphile*(19) die Kenntniss
des Satzes zugeschrieben, dass der Peripheriewinkel im Halbkreise ein
rechter sei. Gewiss hat Thales wenigstens jene geometrischen Fundamente in
Aegypten kennen gelernt, welche es ihm ermöglichten, die genannten Sätze
als wahr zu erkennen, wenn auch bei ihm, selbst bei diesen einfachen
Dingen an einen strengen Beweis nicht gedacht werden kann.

Es wäre jedoch voreilig, aus der Geringfügigkeit der Thaletischen
geometrischen Kenntnisse mit *Montucla* (20) zu schliessen, dass auch die
Aegypter nicht viel mehr gewusst hätten. Man kann wohl annehmen, dass die
aegyptischen Priester bei ihrer den Fremden gegenüber beobachteten
Zurückhaltung nur einen Theil ihres Wissens offenbarten; wer könnte jedoch
bemessen, in welchem Verhältnisse dieser Theil zu ihrem Gesammtwissen
stand? Der Ansicht *Montucla*'s kann man entgegensetzen, dass die Aegypter
den Fremden nur einen kleinen Bruchtheil ihres sorgsam im Verborgenen
gehüteten Wissens preisgegeben haben mochten, wobei ferner nicht
unberücksichtigt bleiben darf, dass den nach Aegypten gekommenen Griechen
auch die Unkenntniss der Sprache und der Schrift weitere, nicht zu
unterschätzende Schwierigkeiten bereitete, in dem Maasse als vielleicht
Manches, was ihnen die aegyptischen Priester von aegyptischem Wissen zur
Verfügung stellten, unverstanden bleiben konnte.

Was nun das Wesen aegyptischer Geometrie betrifft, so finden wir in den
Berichten der Alten fast gar keine Anhaltspunkte, um uns hierüber Klarheit
verschaffen zu können, und war man bis vor Kurzem darauf hingewiesen, aus
den Anfängen griechischer Mathematik auf den Stand der aegyptischen
zurückzuschliessen, was, wie aus dem Vorhergesagten folgen dürfte, mit
nicht geringen Schwierigkeiten verbunden erscheint.

Die Ansicht, dass die Geometrie der Aegypter eigentlich nur constructiver
Natur war, ähnlich dem was wir als Reisskunst zu bezeichnen pflegen,(21)
dürfte sich nicht als stichhältig erweisen; es möge jedoch gleich jetzt
darauf hingedeutet werden, dass die Aegypter im Construiren geometrischer
Formen nicht unbewandert sein konnten.

So sagt in etwas prahlerischer Weise *Demokritos* von *Abdera*(22) um 420
v. Chr. G.: »Im Construiren von Linien nach Maassgabe der aus den
Voraussetzungen zu ziehenden Schlüsse hat mich keiner je übertroffen,
selbst nicht die sogenannten Harpedonapten der Aegypter«; und *Theon* von
*Smyrna*(23) erzählt, dass »Babylonier, Chaldäer und Aegypter eifrig nach
allerhand Grundgesetzen und Hypothesen suchten, durch welche den
Erscheinungen genügt werden könnte; zu erreichen suchten sie dies dadurch,
dass sie das früher Gefundene in Ueberlegung zogen, und über die
zukünftigen Erscheinungen Vermuthungen aufstellten, wobei die Einen sich
arithmetischer Methoden bedienten, wie die Chaldäer, die Anderen
construirender wie die Aegypter«.

Aus diesen und ähnlichen Berichten, sowie aus dem Umstande, dass die
Anfänge der griechischen Geometrie selbst hauptsächlich constructiver
Natur waren, muss man zu dem Schlusse kommen, dass die alten Aegypter seit
unvordenklichen Zeiten die Reisskunst pflegten, und in der langen Reihe
der Jahrhunderte sicherlich eine ziemlich bedeutende Masse sowohl
einfacher als complicirterer Constructionen erfanden und in ein gewisses
System brachten, von Ersteren zu Letzteren aufsteigend. Diese
Constructionen dürften ihrem grösseren Theile nach, und zwar jenem Theile
nach, welcher, wenn auch ohne Begründung Gemeingut der die Künste und
Gewerbe betreibenden Kasten wurde, nur solche gewesen sein, die dem
praktischen Bedürfnisse dienen konnten, also zumeist
Ornamentenconstructionen. Wir bemerken hier unter Anderem das Vorkommen
regelmässiger geometrischer Figuren auf uralten Wandgemälden, wie sie sich
z. B. als färbige Zeichnungen aus den Zeiten der fünften Dynastie, also
unmittelbar nach den Erbauern der Pyramiden, das ist 3400 Jahre v. Chr. G.
etwa vorfinden.(24)

Man sieht unter der grossen Menge der in dieser Zeit vorkommenden Figuren
eine, aus verschobenen, ineinander gezeichneten, theilweise durch zu einer
Diagonale Parallele zerlegten Quadraten zusammengesetzte Figur, ferner aus
der Zeit von der zwölften bis zur sechsundzwanzigsten Dynastie, eine
Figur, bestehend aus einem Quadrate, und zwei, längs der Diagonale
centrisch hineingelegten lemniscatischen Curven, sowie eine
Zusammenstellung von um fünfundvierzig Grade gegeneinander verdrehten,
sich durchsetzenden Quadraten. Kreise erscheinen durch ihre Durchmesser in
gleiche Kreisausschnitte getheilt; so zunächst durch zwei oder vier
Durchmesser in vier beziehungsweise acht, und in späteren Zeiten auch
durch sechs Durchmesser in zwölf gleiche Ausschnitte; die in den
Zeichnungen vorkommenden Wagenräder besitzen zumeist sechs, seltener vier
Speichen, so dass auch die Theilung des Kreises durch drei Diameter in
sechs gleiche Kreisausschnitte vertreten erscheint.

In einer unvollendet gebliebenen Kammer des Grabes *Seti I.*, des Vater
*Ramses II.* aus der neunzehnten Dynastie (das sogenannte Grab
*Belzoni*)(25) finden wir die Wände behufs Anbringung von Reliefarbeiten
mit einem Netze gleich grosser Quadrate bedeckt, und es kann keinem
Zweifel unterliegen, dass wir es hier mit der Anwendung eines
Verkleinerungs- beziehungsweise Vergrösserungsmaassstabes zu thun haben.

Wenn nun auch die einfachen Figuren des Dreieckes, Quadrates und des
Kreises höchst wahrscheinlich ohne besondere Ueberlegung, einfach dem
inneren geometrischen Formendrange entsprungen sein dürften, so ist doch
gewiss, dass ihre verschiedenartige Zusammensetzung zu Mustern das
Product, wenn auch primitiven geometrischen Denkens war, welches dann
schon eine ziemliche Selbstständigkeit erreicht haben musste, als die
vorerwähnte Anwendung von Proportionalmaassstäben in Uebung kam.

Andererseits musste das öftere Betrachten der regelmässigen Figuren einen
geometrisch disponirten Geist von selbst zum Aufsuchen unbekannter
Eigenschaften derselben reizen, und vielleicht ist der Thaletische Satz
von der Halbirung des Kreises durch einen Durchmesser nichts als eine aus
der Betrachtung jener aegyptischen Zeichnungen gewonnene Abstraction, und
huldigen wir in dieser Beziehung der Ansicht, dass *Thales* beim
Ausspruche des erwähnten, für uns freilich höchst einfach klingenden
Satzes, wahrscheinlich sagen wollte, nur der Kreis habe die ausgezeichnete
Eigenschaft, von allen durch einen Punkt, den Mittelpunkt, gehenden
Geraden in lauter untereinander gleiche Hälften getheilt zu werden.

Von besonderer Wichtigkeit scheint uns jedoch der früher citirte
selbstgefällige Ausspruch des *Demokritos* zu sein, da er uns vor einer
ungerechtfertigten Unterschätzung aegyptischer Constructionsgewandtheit
bewahren kann. Bedenklich in *Demokritos*' Angabe könnte allenfalls jenes
Selbstlob erscheinen, das er sich spendet; wenn es nun wohl auch schon im
Alterthume Männer geben mochte, die ihre Berühmtheit vorzugsweise und oft
nur der Hochschätzung verdankten, die sie sich selbst und ihren Werken
gezollt, Männer, welche in der Verbreitung des eigenen Lobes so emsig, so
unermüdlich waren, dass sich um sie als die davon Ueberzeugtesten noch ein
Kreis von Gläubigen bildete, welche den, oft nur auf schwankenden Füssen
einhergehenden Ruhm ihrer Profeten weiter führten, so ist doch die
Bedeudung des Geometers *Demokritos* durch so viele, und verschiedenen
Quellen entspringende Aussprüche beglaubigt, dass es gewiss Niemandem
einfallen wird, seine Autorität als die eines gründlichen Kenners der
Geometrie seiner Zeit in Zweifel zu ziehen. Wohl sind uns von den
geometrischen Werken des *Demokritos*, und kaum von allen nur die ganz
allgemein klingenden Titel erhalten.

Während uns *Cicero*(26) diesen Philosophen als einen gelehrten, in der
Geometrie vollkommen bewanderten Mann anpreist, theilt uns *Diogenes
Laertius*(27) mit, dass *Demokritos* »über Geometrie«, »über Zahlen«,
»über den Unterschied des Gnomon oder über die Berührung des Kreises und
der Kugel«, sowie zwei Bücher »über irrationale Linien und die dichten
Dinge« geschrieben habe, Schriften, deren Titel theilweise uns über ihren
Inhalt ganz im Unklaren lassen. Legen wir den angeführten Zeugnissen
Glauben bei, und es ist kein Grund vorhanden dies nicht zu thuh, so müssen
wir von *Demokritos* als von einem »in der Geometrie vollkommenen Manne«
voraussetzen, dass er mit den Errungenschaften des *Pythagoras*, welcher
ein Jahrhundert vor *Demokritos* Aegypten besucht hatte, vollkommen
vertraut war. Gewiss war ihm somit bekannt: die Methode der »Anlegung der
Flächen«, welche wieder die Vertrautheit mit den Hauptsätzen aus der
Theorie der Parallelen und der Winkel, so wie die Kenntniss der
Abhängigkeit der Flächeninhalte von den ihnen zukommenden Ausmaassen
voraussetzt. Nicht minder bekannt mussten ihm die, dem *Pythagoras*
zugeschriebenen Constructionen der fünf regelmässigen, sogenannten
kosmischen Körper sein, woraus sich weiter schliessen lässt, dass auch
einerseits die Eigenschaften der Kugel, welcher doch jene Körper
eingeschrieben wurden, und anderseits die Entstehungen der regelmässigen,
jene Körper begrenzenden Vielecke, vor Allem die des Fünfeckes dem
*Demokritos* nicht ungeläufig sein konnten. Die Construction des Letzteren
erheischt wiederum die Kenntniss der Lehre vom goldenen Schnitt, und diese
den Satz vom Quadrate der Hypothenuse(28). Hat nun *Demokritos* auch
selbst nichts Neues hinzugefügt, so musste er doch Jenes kennen; wenn er
nun anderseits sagt: »im Construiren hätte ihn Niemand, selbst nicht die
Harpedonapten der Aegypter übertroffen«, so dürfen wir hieraus mit
Sicherheit schliessen, dass die geometrischen Kenntnisse der aegyptischen
Priester bedeutend genug gewesen sein mussten, weil sich *Demokritos*
sonst kaum gerade über diese Geometer gesetzt hätte.

Doch verlassen wir für jetzt die Nachrichten des griechischen Alterthums,
welche in der Beurtheilung aegyptischer Geometrie nur Conjecturen
zulassen, und blicken wir nach directen Denkmalen aegyptischen Ursprungs,
aus denen vielleicht Schlüsse gezogen werden könnten auf Wesen und Umfang
aegyptischer Geometrie.

Das Britische Museum bewahrt eine Papyrusrolle, welche aus dem Nachlasse
des Engländers *A. Henry Rhind* stammt, die derselbe nebst anderen
werthvollen Rollen in Aegypten käufllich an sich gebracht haben dürfte.
Der erwähnte Papyrus, ein altes Denkmal ägyptischer Mathematik, ist, wie
es scheint, nicht mit vollster Berechtigung als ein »mathematisches
Handbuch« der alten Aegypter bezeichnet worden(29). Der fragliche Papyrus
nennt sich selbst eine Nachahmung älterer mathematischer Schriften, denn
es heisst in der Einleitung: »Verfasst wurde diese Schrift im Jahre
dreiunddreissig im vierten Monat der Wasserzeit unter König Ra-a-us, Leben
gebend nach dem Muster alter Schriften in den Zeiten des Königs ...ât vom
Schreiber Aahmes verfasst die Schrift.«

Nachdem zuerst Dr. *Birch*(30) auf diesen mathematischen Papyrus durch
einen kurzen vorläufigen Bericht aufmerksam gemacht hatte, wurde der
Gegenstand von dem ausgezeichneten Heidelberger Aegyptologen Dr.
*Eisenlohr* einer eingehenden, höchst schwierigen und zeitraubenden
Untersuchung unterzogen, deren Resultate, was die Uebersetzung betrifft,
unseren gegenwärtigen Betrachtungen zu Grunde liegen. Bezüglich des Alters
des Papyrus hat man jenes der vorhandenen Abschrift von dem Alter des
unbekannten Originals zu unterscheiden. Nach der von *Eisenlohr* gegebenen
Vervollständigung der in der erwähnten Einleitung auf das Wort König
folgenden Lücke, würde der Herrscher, unter dessen Regierung das Original
entstanden ist, der König *Ra-en-mat* sein, dessen Regierungszeit
*Lepsius*(31) auf 2221--2179 v. Chr. G. legt. Da ferner der Name *Ra-a-us*
in den bis dahin vorhandenen Königslisten nicht vorkommt, sah man sich, um
die Zeit der Entstehung der Abschrift wenigstens annähernd angeben zu
können, darauf angewiesen, aus der bekannten Sitte der Aegypter die
Eigennamen der eben herrschenden oder der unmittelbar vorhergegangenen
Regenten zu gebrauchen, Schlüsse zu ziehen. Und da liess der Name *Aahmes*
des Schreibers, sowie auch die (althieratische) Schrift des Papyrus
vermuthen, dass derselbe um 1700 v. Chr. G. entstanden sein dürfte. Die
Vermuthung in Bezug auf das Zeitalter der Abschrift hat sich nun neueren
Forschungen zu Folge vollkommen bestätigt. Denn *Ra-a-us* wurde als der
Hyksoskönig *Apophis* erkannt, und *Aahmes* dürfte seinen Namen von dem,
kurze Zeit dem Apophis vorhergegangenen Könige *Amasis* entlehnt haben.

Es erscheint so vollkommen sichergestellt, dass unser Papyrus aus dem
achtzehnten Jahrhundert v. Chr. G. stammt. Die Eingangsworte des Papyrus,
welche lauten: »Vorschrift zu gelangen zur Kenntniss aller dunklen Dinge,
aller Geheimnisse, welche enthalten sind in den Gegenständen«, sowie die
Anordnung des Stoffes in Arithmetik, Planimetrie und Stereometrie, an
welche sich ein, verschiedene Beispiele enthaltender Theil anschliesst,
konnten im ersten Augenblicke den Gedanken aufkommen lassen, dass wir es
vielleicht mit einem Lehrbuche der Mathematik zu thun haben. Der Umstand
jedoch, dass der Papyrus nur die Zusammenstellung, allerdings eine in
gewissem Grade systematische Zusammenstellung von Aufgaben nebst ihren
Lösungen und den zugehörigen Proben ist, ohne dass Definitionen oder
Lehrsätze und Beweise vorkommen würden, liess den Papyrus wiederum als
eine Aufgabensammlung, als ein Anleitungsbuch für Praktiker erscheinen.
Man ist noch weiter gegangen, und stellte die Ansicht auf, der Autor habe
bei Abfassung dieser Schrift vorzüglich an Landleute, welchen die Theorie
unzugänglich war, gedacht. Daraufhin weise nicht nur die Formulirung des
grössten Theiles der Aufgaben, welche Verhältnisse und Bedürfnisse der
Landwirthschaft berücksichtigen, sondern auch der Schlusssatz des Papyrus,
welcher sagt: »Fange das Ungeziefer und die Mäuse, (vertilge) das
verschiedenartige Unkraut, bitte Gott *Ra* um Wärme, Wind und hohes
Wasser«.

Dass wir es nicht mit einem Handbuche, welches dem damaligen Standpunkte
der mathematischen Wissenschaften in Aegypten entsprechen müsste, zu thun
haben, ergibt sich nicht nur aus dem schon hervorgehobenen Mangel an
Definitionen, Lehrsätzen und Beweisen, ja es fehlt selbst jede Erklärung,
sondern auch aus dem Umstände, dass neben der richtigen Lösung einzelner
Aufgaben die unrichtigen oder unvollendeten Lösungen derselben oder
ähnlicher Aufgaben, sowie manche Wiederholungen vorkommen. Nur nebenbei
verweisen wir darauf, dass in einem Handbuche unzweifelhaft wenigstens
Anklänge an die erste der Wissenschaften des Alterthums, an die
Astronomie, zu finden sein müssten. Doch ist von diesem Theile der
Mathematik im Papyrus nicht die geringste Spur zu finden. Aufklärungen
über den wahren Charakter des Originals unseres Papyrus, und eine viele
Wahrscheinlichkeit besitzende Vermuthung über die Entstehung der uns
beschäftigenden Abschrift, verdanken wir dem Scharfsinne des französischen
Aegyptologen Eugène *Revillout*.(32)

Bei richtiger Erwägung des Umstandes, dass oft auf ein fehlerlos gelöstes
Beispiel, falsche Lösungen ähnlicher Beispiele folgen, welchen sich dann
gewöhnlich eine Reihe von Uebungsrechnungen anschliesst, Rechnungen die
einem Schulpensum in hohem Grade ähnlich sehen, bei Betrachtung der
Thatsache ferner, wie ein und dasselbe Zahlenbeispiel oft einigemal und
zwar so behandelt wird, dass der Reihe nach die vorkommenden Zahlenwerthe
als die berechneten Resultate erscheinen, drängt sich uns mit *Eugène
Revillout* die Ueberzeugung auf, dass wir es mit dem Uebungs- oder
Aufgabenhefte eines Zöglings jener Unterrichtshäuser (a·sbo) zu thun
haben, wie deren in so manchem Papyrus Erwähnung geschieht, und in denen
die Schüler, welche später Landwirthe, Verwalter, Feldmesser oder
Constructeure werden wollten, mit den für ihre künftige Laufbahn
notwendigen Rechnungsoperationen vertraut gemacht wurden. Da dieses
Schulheft selbstverständlich nicht für die Oeffentlichkeit bestimmt sein
konnte, so trägt es auch thatsächlich keinen Autornamen und keine
Jahresangabe; denn, was die in der Einleitung bezüglich der Zeitperiode,
in welcher das Original entstanden sein sollte, gemachte Erwähnung
betrifft, so ist mehr als wahrscheinlich, dass dieselbe von dem
Abschreiber *Aahmes* herrührt, welcher das Original einige Jahrhunderte
nach seiner Entstehung auffand, und dasselbe, der Mathematik gewiss ganz
unkundig, sammt allen Fehlern abschrieb, zu diesen noch neue hinzufügend.
Nachdem *Aahmes* aus der Aehnlichkeit der Schriftart des mathematischen
Heftes mit der Schrift anderer ihm bekannten Papyri auf das Alter des
ersteren einen im Ganzen und Grossen nicht unrichtigen Schluss gezogen
haben mochte, so können wir das Ende, vielleicht auch die Mitte des
dritten Jahrtausends v. Chr. G. als jene Zeit betrachten, in welcher das
Original der Abschrift entstanden sein dürfte. Ob *Aahmes* die Abschrift
mit der viel versprechenden Einleitung und der zugleich praktischen und
gottesfürchtigen Schlussregel in der Absicht versehen hatte, um sie an
irgend einen einfachen aegyptischen Landmann um gutes Geld anzubringen,
lassen wir dahingestellt, und wiederholen nur unsere Uebereinstimmung mit
der Ansicht, dass das Original des Papyrus neben den von einem Lehrer der
Mathematik herrührenden Musterbeispielen, die sehr oft verunglückten
Uebungen eines Schülers enthält, eines Schülers überdies, der nicht zu den
hervorragenden seiner Glasse gehört haben mochte. Und wie kostbar ist
dennoch dieses altägyptische Schulheft! Wenn wir in aller Eile eine Skizze
seines Inhaltes vorführen sollen, so müssen wir zunächst die sich auf acht
Columnen der oben erwähnten Einleitung anschliessende Theilung der Zahl 2
durch die Zahlen von 3 bis 99 erwähnen; jeder auftretende Bruch erscheint
in zwei bis vier sogenannte Stammbrüche, Brüche mit dem Zähler Eins,
zerlegt, und sind die Nenner der letzteren meist gerade Zahlen mit einer
grösseren Divisorenanzahl. Im Anschluss an diese Tabelle finden wir sechs
Beispiele, in denen in Form von Brodvertheilungen die Division der Zahlen
l, 3, 6, 7, 8 und 9 durch die Zahl 10 gelehrt wird, und es folgt hierauf
in 17 Beispielen die sogenannte Sequem- oder Ergänzungsrechnung, in
welcher es sich darum handelt, Zahlenwerthe zu finden, die mit gegebenen
Werthen durch Addition oder Multiplication verbunden, andere gegebene
Zahlenwerthe liefern. Die nächsten 15 Beispiele gehören der sogenannten
*Haurechnung* an, und finden wir in diesem Abschnitte die Lösungen
linearer Gleichungen mit einer Unbekannten. Zwei weitere, der sogenannten
*Tunnu-* oder Unterschiedsrechnung angehörige Beispiele belehren uns
darüber, dass den alten Aegyptern der Begriff arithmetischer Reihen nicht
fremd war. Es folgen nun sieben Beispiele über Volumetrie, ebensoviele
über Geometrie und fünf Beispiele über Berechnungen von Pyramiden, also 19
Aufgaben über die wir später noch einige Worte sagen müssen.

Hieran schliessen sich endlich dreiundzwanzig verschiedenen Materien
entlehnte, Fragen des bürgerlichen Lebens betreffende Beispiele, wie die
Berechnung des Werthes von Schmuckgegenständen, abermals Vertheilungen von
Broden oder von Getreide, Bestimmung des auf einen Tag entfallenden
Theiles eines Jahresertrages, Berechnungen von Arbeitslöhnen,
Nahrungsmitteln sowie des Futters für Geflügelhöfe. Einer besonderen
Ankündigung werth erscheinen uns in dieser letzten Abtheilung zwei
Beispiele; das eine derselben(33) lässt keinen Zweifel darüber aufkommen,
dass den alten Aegyptern die Theorie der arithmetischen Progressionen
vollkommen geläufig war, während wir in dem zweiten(34) unter der
Aufschrift »eine Leiter« die geometrische Progression von 7 hoch 1 bis 7
hoch 5 nebst deren Summe vorfinden, wobei die einzelnen Potenzen eigene
Namen: an, Katze, Maus, Gerste, Maass zu führen scheinen.

Nicht unbemerkt lassen wir endlich die in den Haurechnungen auftretende
Benützung mathematischer Zeichen; so nach links oder rechts
ausschreitender Beine für Addition und Subtraction, drei horizontale
Pfeile für Differenz, sowie endlich ein besonderes, dem unseren nicht
unähnliches Gleichheitszeichen.

Aus dem geometrischen Theile heben wir zunächst, der Anordnung des Papyrus
nicht folgend, die Flächenberechnungen von Feldern hervor. Die
vorkommenden Beispiele beziehen sich auf quadratische, rechteckige,
kreisrunde und trapezförmige Felder, deren Flächeninhalte aus ihren
Längenmaassen bestimmt werden. Nachdem in den Aufgaben über die Berechnung
des Fassungsvermögens von Fruchtspeichern mit quadratischer Grundfläche
diese letztere gefunden wird durch Multiplication der Maasszahl der Seite
mit sich selbst, kann es gar keinem Zweifel unterliegen, dass auch die
Fläche des Rechteckes durch Multiplication der Maasszahlen zweier
zusammenstossender Seiten erhalten wurde, da die Erkenntniss der
Richtigkeit der einen Bestimmungsart, jene der Richtigkeit der anderen
involvirt.

Schon die Betrachtung solcher Proportionalmaassstäbe, wie wir sie im Grabe
*Belzoni* bemerken konnten, hätte die alten Aegypter, die mit Gleichungen
und arithmetischen Reihen umzugehen wussten, auf die Bestimmung der Fläche
eines Rechteckes aus seinen beiden Seitenlängen mit Nothwendigkeit führen
müssen, und werden wir uns durch den Umstand, dass im Papyrus der
diesbezüglichen Aufgabe eine zu ihr nicht gehörige Lösung beigefügt ist,
durchaus nicht beirren lassen.

Von hohem Interesse ist die, an mehreren Stellen des Papyrus vorkommende
Methode der Flächenberechnung eines Kreises, welche zeigt, dass die alten
Aegypter mit ziemlicher Annäherung den Kreis zu quadriren wussten, in der
That zu quadriren, weil sie aus dem Durchmesser eine Länge ableiten,
welche als Seite ein Quadrat liefert, dessen Fläche jener des Kreises
gleichgesetzt wurde. Da sie acht Neuntel des Durchmessers zur Seite jenes
Quadrates machten, so entspricht dies einem Werthe der Ludolphischen Zahl,
welcher dem richtigen Werthe gegenüber um nicht ganz zwei Hundertstel (um
0,018901) zu hoch gegriffen erscheint; für das dritte Jahrtausend
v. Chr. G. und im Vergleiche zu dem Werth pi = 3 der Babylonier, und noch
mehr im Vergleiche zu dem Werthe pi = 4 späterer römischer Geometer,
jedenfalls eine nicht zu unterschätzende Annäherung an den richtigen
Werth.

Eine Aufgabe behandelt die Flächenbestimmung des Dreieckes, wobei das
Resultat als das Product zweier Seitenlängen gefunden wird. Die hier
beigefügte Figur(35), welche in Wirklichkeit ein ungleichseitiges
langgestrecktes Dreieck darstellt, kann ebensowohl als die verfehlte
Zeichnung eines rechtwinkligen wie auch eines gleichschenkligen Dreieckes
betrachtet werden.

Letztere Annahme ist von *Eisenlohr* gemacht und von *Cantor*(36)
acceptirt worden. Darnach würde sich die Methode der Dreiecksberechnung
der alten Aegypter nur als eine Näherungsmethode darstellen, und ist auch
von beiden genannten Gelehrten der begangene, in diesem Falle in der That
nicht bedeutende Fehler ermittelt worden.

Wir sind dagegen mit Revillout anderer Meinung.

Mit Rücksicht auf den von uns klar erkannten Charakter des Originales des
Papyrus als eines sehr ungenauen Collegienheftes, dessen Rechnungen
ebensosehr wie die vorkommenden Zeichnungen von der Mittelmässigkeit
seines Zusammenstellers beredtes Zeugniss ablegen, zweifeln wir keinen
Augenblick, dass die fragliche Figur ein rechtwinkliges Dreieck
vorzustellen hatte. Die mangelhafte Schülerzeichnung ist durch den
Copisten *Aahmes* nur noch schlechter geworden. Dass ein rechtwinkliges
Dreieck gemeint sein soll, erkennt man übrigens auch aus dem Umstande,
dass in der Figur die Maasszahlen der multiplicirten Seiten bei den
Schenkeln des, vom rechten Winkel nur wenig differirenden Winkels
angesetzt sind, wo doch, wenn es sich hätte um ein gleichschenkliges
Dreieck handeln sollen die Maasszahl der Schenkel in der Figur gewiss bei
beiden Schenkeln zu finden wäre. Dieselben Gründe bestimmen uns zu der
Annahme, dass die im Papyrus befindliche Flächenberechnung eines Trapezes
eine vollkommen richtige ist, indem es sich auch hier nur um ein Trapez
handeln kann, dessen zwei parallelen Seiten auf einer der nicht parallelen
Seiten senkrecht stehen. Und warum sollten denn die alten Aegypter nicht
die richtige Art der Flächenberechnung auch beliebiger Dreiecke gekannt
haben?

Konnte man einmal die Fläche eines Rechteckes genau bestimmen, so musste
sich durch einfache Anschauung eines, durch eine Diagonale zerlegten
Rechteckes, von selbst die Regel zur Flächenbestimmung des rechtwinkligen
Dreieckes ergeben; und wurde nun ein beliebiges schiefwinkliges Dreieck
durch ein Höhenperpendikel in zwei rechtwinklige zerlegt, so war nichts
leichter als die allgemeine Regel zur Bestimmung der Dreieckfläche aus
Basis und Höhe (tepro und merit) zu entwickeln. Dass die Gewinnung des
Höhenperpendikels sowohl bei Constructionen als auch auf dem Felde den
alten Aegyptern nicht unmöglich war, folgt zunächst aus der grossen
Bedeutung der Winkelmaasses (hapt) für alle Operationen der praktischen
Geometer Aegyptens. Nicht nur, dass wir in vielen aegyptischen Documenten
das Winkelmaass erwähnt finden, sieht man auch Könige abgebildet, das
Winkelmaass in der Hand, welches von ihnen vielleicht in derselben Weise
durch symbolische Benützung geehrt wurde, wie der Kaiser von China
alljährlich einmal den Pflug zu führen pflegt. Ein solches Winkelmaass
sieht man übrigens auch auf einem Wandgemälde abgebildet, das eine
Schreinerwerkstätte darstellt,(37) und es unterliegt keinem Zweifel, dass
dasselbe ebensowohl zur Anlegung rechter Winkel als zum Fällen von
Senkrechten benützt worden ist. Aber auch auf freiem Felde musste den
Aegyptern die Construction rechter Winkel geläufig sein; sowohl die
Pyramiden als auch die aegyptischen Tempel sind vollkommen orientirt, und
wurde, wie uns alte Inschriften(38) belehren, die Orientirung in
festlicher Weise vom Könige unter Beihilfe der Bibliotheksgöttin *Safech*
vollzogen, mit den Worten: »Ich habe gefasst den Holzpflock und den Stiel
des Schlägels, ich halte den Strick gemeinschaftlich mit der Göttin
*Safech*. Mein Blick folgt dem Gange der Gestirne. Wenn mein Auge an dem
Sternbilde des grossen Bären angekommen ist, und erfüllt ist der mir
bestimmte Zeitabschnitt der Zahl der Uhr, so stelle ich auf die Eckpunkte
Deines Gotteshauses.«

In welchem Maasse bei diesen Operationen die von *Demokritos* so
hochgestellten *Harpedonapten* oder Seilspanner betheiligt waren, hat
*Cantor*(39) in höchst scharfsinniger Weise zu beleuchten versucht, und es
erscheint auch uns wahrscheinlich, dass sich die alten Aegypter beim
Construiren rechter Winkel sowie beim Fällen von Senkrechten auf dem
Felde, der Thatsache bedienten, dass der eine Winkel in einem, die
Seitenlängen drei, vier und fünf besitzenden Dreiecke, ein rechter Winkel
sein müsse. Musste ja doch dieser Satz seit unvordenklichen Zeiten auch
den Chinesen bekannt sein, da wir ihn in der bei ihnen so berühmten
Schrift _Tschiu-pi_ finden, welche mehrere Jahrhunderte v. Chr. G.
entstanden, auf den Kaiser *Tschiu-Kung* also in das Jahr 1100 v. Chr. G.
etwa zurückgeführt wird.(40) Uebrigens konnten directe Messungsversuche an
diagonalen Linien in den Proportionalmaassstäben sowohl zu dem erwähnten
als auch noch zu anderen rechtwinkligen Dreiecken mit rationalen
Seitenlängen geführt haben, und scheint uns die Möglichkeit nicht
ausgeschlossen, dass der berühmte und berüchtigte Satz des *Pythagoras*
über die Quadrate der Katheten und der Hypothenuse einer eingehenden
Untersuchung solcher Proportionalmaassstäbe entsprungen ist.

Wenn wir nun einerseits behaupten, dass die alten Aegypter nicht nur die
Fläche des Kreises, des Quadrates, des Rechteckes, des rechtwinkligen
sowie des schiefen Dreieckes, und unter Zuhilfenahme der Zerlegungen auch
die Flächen beliebiger Polygone theoretisch genau zu bestimmen im Stande
waren, mit Ausnahme der auch für uns eine solche bildenden Kreisfläche, so
muss doch anderseits zugestanden werden, dass man sich bei praktischen
Anwendungen mit Näherungen begnügte, welche im Laufe der Zeiten so
ausarteten, dass der Gebrauch falscher Regeln ein allgemeiner wurde.

Am linken Nilufer in der Mitte zwischen *Theben* und *Assuan* liegt
*Edfu*, das alte *Appollinopolis Magna* mit einem stattlichen Tempelbau
aus den Zeiten der Ptolomäer. Der Tempel, hauptsächlich dem Gotte *Horus*
geweiht, ist mit einer freistehenden Umfassungsmauer umgeben,(41) deren
Ostseite zwischen dem Brunnenthore und dem östlichen Pylonflügel eine
Inschrift trägt, welche uns auf acht Feldern und in hundertvierundsechzig
Columnen(42) eine Schenkungsurkunde des Königs *Ptolomäus XI. Alexander
I.* (mit dem Beinamen *Philometor*) bekannt gibt. Das Geschenk, welches
hier *Horus* und den übrigen Göttern von *Edfu* verliehen wird, besteht
aus einer Anzahl von meist viereckigen Aeckern, deren vier Seitenlängen
nebst Flächeninhalten angegeben erscheinen.

Da jeder der vorkommenden Flächeninhalte identisch ist mit dem Producte
der arithmetischen Mittel der beiden Gegenseitenpaare, so wurde nach
*Lepsius* die Vermuthung aufgestellt, die alten Aegypter hätten, um
Vierecke bei der Flächenbestimmung annähernd wie Rechtecke behandeln zu
können, den Unterschied der Gegenseiten dadurch auszugleichen gesucht,
dass sie die arithmetischen Mittel derselben in Rechnung zogen.

Bei sehr vielen der in der *Edfu*er Schenkungsurkunde vorkommenden
Vierecke ist der Unterschied je zweier Gegenseiten entweder Null oder
verhältnissmässig so klein, dass man den betreffenden Vierecken eine vom
Rechtecke wenig verschiedene Gestalt beilegen kann, und die erhaltenen
Resultate somit eine ziemliche Annäherung an den richtigen Flächenwerth
darstellen dürften, nach dem man mit Rücksicht auf die bei *Sesostris*
bemerkte Eintheilung des Landes in Rechtecke voraussetzen darf, gerade
diese oder eine ihr zunächst kommende Form der Felder sei die auch damals
schon beliebte gewesen.

Doch kommen auch Vierecke vor, wo der Längenunterschied der Gegenseiten
ein bemerkenswerther ist; ja es werden auch Dreiecke als Vierecke mit
einer verschwindenden Seite behandelt, so dass der begangene Fehler in
manchen Fällen ein nicht unbedeutender ist.

Nur nebenbei bemerken wir, dass man dieselbe unrichtige Flächenformel für
das Viereck erhält, wenn man dasselbe zunächst durch eine Diagonale in
zwei Dreiecke zerlegt, auf jedes dieser Dreiecke die unrichtige
Flächenformel, die den Inhalt als das halbe Product der beiden Seiten
liefert, anwendet, die beiden so erhaltenen Dreiecksflächen addirt und
dann aus dieser Summe und jener, welche man bei dem ähnlichen Vorgange
durch Zerlegung mittelst der zweiten Diagonale erhält, das arithmetische
Mittel construirt.

Nimmt man mit *Eisenlohr* und *Cantor* an, dass die Aegypter die
Dreiecksfläche wirklich dem halben Producte zweier Seiten gleichsetzten,
so steht man vor der Frage, warum nicht in derselben Art die Flächen der
in der *Edfu*er Schenkungsurkunde auftretenden Dreiecke bestimmt
erscheinen?

Uebrigens wolle man sich darüber nicht wundern, dass es überhaupt möglich
war, die Flächenberechnungen im praktischen Leben nach einer so falschen
Methode durchzuführen. Wissen wir doch, dass im Alterthume, zur Zeit
*Platon*s, einer der gebildetsten Männer, einer der hervorragendsten
Geschichtschreiber, dass *Thukydides*(43) in seiner Unkenntniss der
Beziehung zwischen Flächeninhalt und Umfang, die Fläche einer Insel nach
der zu ihrer Umschiffung nothwendigen Zeit zu bestimmen suchte; in der
Geometrie *Gerbert*'s,(44) des nachmaligen Papstes *Silvester II.* finden
wir, 1000 Jahre nach Chr. G., die Fläche eines gleichschenkligen Dreieckes
durch Multiplication des Schenkels mit der halben Basis berechnet, wo doch
schon *Hero von ** Alexandrien*(45) 1100 Jahre früher die richtige Formel
für diese Berechnung kennt.

Wir berühren diese Thatsachen, und könnten noch eine ganze Reihe ähnlicher
Beispiele anführen, nur um zu zeigen, wie übereilt es wäre, aus den oft
nur schwache Annäherungen liefernden Berechnungen der *Edfu*er
Schenkungsurkunde schliessen zu wollen, die richtigen Methoden seien den
in die Wissenschaften eingeweihten aegyptischen Priestern nicht bekannt
gewesen.

Doch zurück zum Papyrus *Rhind*.

Wir übergehen die Inhaltsbestimmungen von Fruchthäusern, bei denen der
Inhalt durch Multiplication einer Fläche mit einer Länge bestimmt wird,
weil wir es für müssig halten, Erörterungen darüber anzustellen, welche
Flächen und Längen hiebei gemeint sind, so lange uns über die Form jener
Fruchthäuser oder Speicher nichts bekannt ist.

Dagegen erwecken die im Papyrus vorkommenden Pyramiden-Berechnungen das
höchste Interesse, besonders nach den glänzenden Untersuchungen, welchen
*Revillout* diesen Gegenstand unterzogen hat, und deren Resultate wir,
entgegen der von *Eisenlohr* ausgesprochenen und auch von *Lepsius*(46)
acceptirten Ansicht als solche betrachten, welche in einfacher und
natürlicher Weise die sogenannte *Seket*-Rechnung der alten Aegypter
beleuchten.

Es wird in diesen Rechnungen die Böschung der Seitenflächen einer
quadratischen Pyramide dadurch fixirt, dass jener Theil der Länge eines
der beiden gleichlangen Schenkel des Winkelmaasses berechnet wird, der
sich zur Länge des anderen Schenkels so verhält, wie die halbe Länge der
Basisseite der quadratischen Pyramide zur Höhe derselben.

Zu dem Behufe war der eine der beiden Schenkel des Winkelmaasses in eine
gewisse Anzahl gleich grosser Theile getheilt, während der andere
Schenkel, der Pyramidenhöhe entsprechend, und als Einheit betrachtet,
ungetheilt blieb.

Um nun den sogenannten *Seket* zu bestimmen, wurde die halbe Länge der
Basisseite durch die Pyramidenhöhe dividirt und mit dem erhaltenen
Quotienten die Anzahl der Theile des horizontalen, getheilten Schenkels
des Winkelmaasses multiplicirt.

Es war somit der Seket (welcher in derselben Art für einen geraden
Kreiskegel aus dem Durchmesser der Basis und der Höhe bestimmt erscheint)
als Verhältniss aufgefasst, die goniometrische Cotangente des
Neigungswinkels der Seitenfläche der Pyramide, respective der Kegelkante
zur Basis.

Wenn wir selbstverständlich weit davon entfernt sind, hierin vielleicht
Anfänge der Trigonometrie sehen zu wollen, so erkennen wir doch
anderseits, dass den alten Aegyptern auch die Lehre proportionaler Linien,
wenigstens in ihren Anwendungen, bekannt gewesen sein musste, und
erscheint uns auch der am Eingange erwähnte Ausspruch über die dem
Milesier *Thales* zugeschriebene Höhenmessung der Pyramiden als ein ganz
glaubwürdiger, wenn wir sehen, wie im Papyrus von den drei Werthen: Basis,
Höhe, Seket, jeder aus den beiden anderen berechnet erscheint.

Fassen wir nun die Ergebnisse unserer Betrachtungen zusammen, so müssen
wir aus der quellenmässig erwiesenen grossen Bewunderung, welche die
ausgesprochen geometrisch hochentwickelten Griechen den aegyptischen
Geometern rückhaltlos zollten, wir müssen aus der unanfechtbaren
Thatsache, dass griechische Geometer den Grund zu ihren Kenntnissen und
Entdeckungen in Aegypten suchten und fanden, wir müssen im Hinblicke auf
das, aus der nun vollends entzifferten[42] *Edfu*er Schenkungsurkunde sich
mit Sicherheit ergebende ausgebreitete und fest organisirte Katasterwesen
der alten Aegypter, welches zugleich mit den zahlreichen, dem öffentlichen
Leben dienenden Land- und Wasserbauten auf eine verhältnissmässig
bedeutend entwickelte Vermessungskunde hinweist, wir müssen endlich aus
dem von uns besprochenen Papyrus, der sich als eine ungenaue Abschrift
eines mangelhaften, aus dem dritten Jahrtausend vor Chr. G. stammenden,
mathematischen Collegien- oder Aufgabenheftes erweist, und aus dessen
Vorhandensein sich fast mit Gewissheit auf damals existirende, neben den
Regeln auch ihre Ableitungen enthaltende Lehrbücher schliessen lässt, wir
können und müssen aus allen diesen Umständen den allgemeinen Schluss
ziehen, dass bereits drei Jahrtausende vor unserer Zeitrechnung sowohl die
arithmetischen, als auch die geometrischen Kenntnisse der Aegypter, einen
für dieses Zeitalter bedeutenden Grad der Entwicklung besassen.

Insbesondere können wir in jenen fernen Zeiten eine staunenswerth
weitgehende Annäherung bei der Berechnung der Kreisfläche beobachten, wir
finden mit vollständiger Sicherheit richtige Flächenbestimmungen des
Quadrates, Rechteckes und des rechtwinkligen Dreieckes; höchst
wahrscheinlich auch richtige Bestimmungen der Flächen schiefwinkliger
Dreiecke und Vierecke, welche im praktischen Leben durch leichter zu
handhabende Annäherungsformeln ersetzt wurden; wir sehen Bestimmungen des
Rauminhaltes durch ihre Dimensionen gegebener Körper und erkennen die
Anfänge der Aehnlichkeitslehre.

Was das geometrische Zeichnen betrifft, so kennen wir schon die
Construction der früher beobachteten regelmässigen Figuren und dürfen
weiter vermuthen, dass die Anlegung rechter Winkel und das Fällen von
Senkrechten sowohl mittelst des Winkelmaasses als auch mittelst rationaler
rechtwinkliger Dreiecke bekannt, und die Zerlegung gegebener Flächen
behufs ihrer Inhaltbestimmung in allgemeiner Verwendung war.

Gewiss werden auch theoretische Resultate bekannt gewesen sein; so die
Hälftung des Kreises durch seinen Durchmesser, die sich aus der
besprochenen Seketrechnung von selbst ergebende Winkelgleichheit an der
Basis gleichschenkliger Dreiecke und gleichseitiger quadratischer
Pyramiden, und wohl noch manches Andere.

Möge es gelingen, durch Auffindung neuer, sowie durch Entzifferung der,
noch ihrer Erklärung harrenden Denkmale und Schriften, von welchen
letzteren, Dank der hohen Munificenz des Erlauchten Curators unserer
Akademie, auch Wien eine imposante Zahl aufweisen kann, möge es so
gelingen noch weitere Anhaltspunkte für die Kenntniss der mathematischen
Thätigkeit des uns bekannten ältesten Culturvolkes, der Aegypter zu
gewinnen!

Diesen unseren Wunsch theilen gewiss Alle, denen die Erforschung der
Culturgeschichte des menschlichen Geschlechtes nicht ohne Wichtigkeit
erscheint!





    1 HERODOT, _Reisebericht_, II, 109.

    2 ISOKRATES, _Busiris_, c. 9.

_    3 Platonis__ Phaedrus_, ed. Ast. I. p. 246.

    4 ARISTOTELES, _Metaph. I_, 1.

    5 DIODOR, I, 69.

    6 Herodot l. c.

_    7 Heronis Alexandr.__ geom. et stereom. reliquiae_, ed. Hultsch. p.
      138.

    8 DIODOR,  I, 81.

    9 STRABON, ed. Meinike, lib. XVII, C. 787, p. 1098.

_   10 Eudemi Rhodii__ Peripatetici fragmenta quae supersunt_. ed. L.
      Spengel. Berlin 1870.

_   11 Procl.__ comment._ ed. Rasil. p. 19; _Barocius_ p. 37.

   12 ISOKRATES, _Busiris_, cap. 11.

   13 STRABON, XIV, 1. 16.

   14 PORPHYRIUS, _De vita Pythagorae_ cap. 7; DIOGENES LAERTIUS, VIII, 3.

   15 DIODOR, I, c. 96.

   16 PROKLOS, ed. Friedlein, 250, 299, 352, 157.

   17 DIOGENES LAERTIUS, I, 27. PLINIUS, _Hist. nat._ XXXVI, 12, 17.

   18 PLUTARCH, ed. Didot. Vol. 2, III, p. 174.

   19 DIOGENES LAERTIUS I, 24--25.

   20 MONTUCLA, _Hist. d. math._ 2. édit. t. I, p. 49.

   21 BRETSCHNEIDER, _Die Geometrie und die Geometer vor Euklides_, p. 11.
      Dem Werke Bretschneiders, sowie jenem CANTOR's: _Vorlesungen über
      Geschichte der Mathematik_, sind die grundlegenden Gedanken
      entnommen.

   22 CLEMENS ALEXANDRINUS, _Stromata_, ed. Potter, I, 357.

   23 THEON SMYRNAIOS, _lib. de astron._ ed. Martin, p. 272.

   24 PRISSE D'AVENNES, _Hist. de l'art Egypt. d'après les monuments._

   25 WILKINSON, _Manners and customs of the ancient Egyptians_, III, p.
      313.

   26 CICERO, _De finibus bonorum ed malorum_ I, 6, 20.

   27 DIOGENES LAERTIUS IX, 47.

   28 CANTOR, _Vorlesungen über Geschichte der Mathematik_, I, p. 144--159
      (Leipzig 1880).

   29 EISENLOHR, _Ein math. Handbuch der alten Aegypter_. Leipzig 1877.

   30 BIRCH, in Lepsius' _Zeitschrift für ägypt. Sprache und Alterthum_,
      1868, p. 108.

   31 LEPSIUS, _ägypt. Zeitschrift_, 1871, p. 63.

   32 REVILLOUT, EUGÈNE, _Revue Egyptologique_, 1881, Nr. II et III, p.
      304.

   33 EISENLOHR, _Ein math. Handbuch der alten Aegypter_. Nr. 64.

   34 ibid. Nr. 79.

   35 ibid. p. 125.

   36 CANTOR, _Vorlesungen aus der Geschichte der Mathematik_, I, p. 49.

   37 WILKINSON, _Manners and customs u. s. w._ III., p. 144.

   38 BRUGSCH, _Ueber Bau und Maasse des Tempels von __Edfu_ (_Zeitschrift
      für ägypt. Sprache u. Alterth._ Bd. VIII.)

   39 CANTOR, _Vorlesungen u. s. w._ I, p. 55.

   40 ÉD. BIOT, _Journal Asiatique_, Paris 1841, I. Sem. p. 593.

   41 LEPSIUS, _Ueber eine hieroglyphische Inschrift am Tempel von
      __Edfu_. _Abhandlung d. Acad. d. Wiss. in Berlin_, 1855, p. 69.

   42 BRUGSCH, _Thesaurus III_, Leipzig 1884.

   43 THUKYDIDES, ed. Rothe, VI. 1.

   44 ed. Olleris, Cap. LXX. p. 460.

_   45 Heronis Alexandrini__ geometricorum et stereometricorum reliquiae_
      (ed. Hultsch, Berlin 1864).

   46 LEPSIUS, _Ueber die 6palmige grosse Elle von 7 kleinen Palmen Länge
      in dem »math. Handbuche« von Eisenlohr_. (_Zeitschrift f. äg. Sp._
      1884. 1. Heft.)








*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ÜBER DIE GEOMETRIE DER ALTEN AEGYPTER. ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Elementary cryptanalysis
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Elementary cryptanalysis

Author: Helen Fouché Gaines

Contributor: George C. Lamb

Release date: January 9, 2025 [eBook #75074]

Language: English

Original publication: Boston: American Photographic Publishing Co, 1939


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTARY CRYPTANALYSIS ***

ELEMENTARY CRYPTANALYSIS

Helen Fouché Gaines
Originally published in 1939 by American Photographic Publishing Co.




PREFACE

The word _cryptography_, properly speaking, embraces the entire field
of secret writing, while that branch of the subject dealing with the
solution and reading of cryptic messages is generally referred to as
_cryptanalysis_.

Works on the subject of secret writing are comparatively numerous,
if not always easily available, but works devoted purely to the
analysis of such writing and the solving of its cryptograms have,
until recently, been so rare as to be almost non-existent for the
general reader.

Today we have two particularly excellent works, but both in foreign
languages: _Cours de cryptographie_, by General Marcel Givierge, and
_Manuale di crittografia_, by General Luigi Sacco. In English, we
find a more elementary work, _The Solution of Codes and Ciphers_,
by Louis C. S. Mansfield (Maclehose, London), which, the writer has
been told, is to be a first volume. As to America’s contribution, we
seem to find only small books such as Colonel Parker Hitt’s
_A B C of Secret Writing_, covering three ciphers, or Colonel H. O.
Yardley’s _Yardleygrams_.

There are, however, many works which deal most interestingly with the
analysis and decryptment of some one particular cipher. Most of these
are short works, published in magazines or incorporated into books of
a general nature, and nearly always the one cipher dealt with is that
type of simple substitution which appears with separated words in the
puzzle section of our current magazines and newspapers.

One well-known gem of cryptanalysis, equal to any modern specimen,
can be found in the story, _The Gold-Bug_, by Edgar Allan Poe. This,
too, deals with the simple substitution cipher just referred to, but
covers a case in which word-divisions are absent. Poe has also left
us an essay called _Cryptography_.

Rosario Candela’s recent book, _The Military Cipher of Commandant
Bazeries_, shows the unraveling of one particular cryptogram which,
for many years, had baffled the best efforts of all amateurs, and,
it is rather suspected, of some few who were not amateurs. The book
contains a chapter on general cryptanalysis, and also some
cryptograms for solution.

_Secret and Urgent_, by Fletcher Pratt, is primarily a history of
secret writing (a most interesting one, by the way), but contains
also a number of examples of cryptanalysis; it also shows a table
which the writer has never before seen in published form: a list of
English trigrams (three-letter sequences) and the frequency with
which they are used in the language. Other examples of decryptment
may be found in the Macbeth translation of Langie’s genial little
book, _De la cryptographie_; the appendix to this translation
contains the coveted Playfair demonstration, prepared by Lieutenant
Commander W. W. Smith of the United States Navy.

Just why so absorbing a subject has been so neglected in a world
full of puzzle lovers is hard to understand, especially since the
analytic writer, in addition to entertainment, has something to
offer of a more serious nature. It is true that trained cryptanalysts
are not greatly in demand in peacetime, and that our present corps
of cryptographers has a personnel more than ample for providing
necessary codes and ciphers, scientifically selected to fit their
individual purposes, and safeguarded with suitable protective devices.
Yet of what value is the most excellent of ciphers if, at the time
of direst need, this cipher, with all of its safeguards, must be
placed in the hands of even one man who cannot appreciate its
intrinsic value or imagine a need for extra precautions? At any rate,
we make our feeble attempt to reach this “one man.” May he learn, at
least, that there are reasons for his instructions!

In the planning of the present treatise, all purely historical
aspects of secret writing were neglected, and many well-known ciphers
whose interest is chiefly historical or literary have either been
omitted or given but cursory treatment. Certain other ciphers,
representative of types, have been treated at whatever length seemed
advisable for bringing out principles; and, with each type discussed,
a generous number of cryptograms has been provided, on which the
student will be able to test his skill as he learns. The student who
masters these fundamentals will be acquainted with the principal
forms of cipher, and will be able to solve cryptograms prepared by
means of these ciphers provided the cryptograms are of adequate
length and based on a language which he understands, or of which he
is able to secure understandable specimens. Within limits, he should
also be able to analyze and solve such cryptograms without being told
in advance what the cipher is. This, we believe, is the kind of
text-book desired by the many who desire information about “ciphers.”

Its material, compiled by members of the American Cryptogram
Association, has had to be gathered from a great many sources, both
within the organization and elsewhere, making it impossible, at times,
to give credit where credit is due. Our chief indebtedness, however,
is to M. E. Ohaver for a series of articles published during the years
1924 to 1928 in the former Flynn’s Magazine and most unfortunately no
longer obtainable from the publishers. Further acknowledgment should
be made to Colonel Parker Hitt, whose _Manual for the Solution of
Military Ciphers_, though not available for general distribution,
can usually be consulted in large public libraries. We have also
borrowed liberally from foreign sources, and members of the
association have most generously contributed the results of their
original research. For this collaboration and co-operation, the
writer is particularly grateful.




CONTENTS

  Preface
      I. General Information
     II. Concealment Devices
    III. Transposition Types
     IV. Geometrical Types — The Nihilist Transposition
      V. Geometrical Types — The Turning Grille
     VI. Irregular Types — Columnar Transposition
    VII. General Methods — Multiple Anagramming, Etc.
   VIII. Substitution Types
     IX. Simple Substitution — Fundamentals
      X. The Consonant-Line Short Cut
         A Method for Attacking Difficult Cases
         (by George C. Lamb)
     XI. Simple Substitution with Complexities
    XII. Multiple-Alphabet Ciphers — The Vigenère
   XIII. The Gronsfeld, Porta, and Beaufort Ciphers
    XIV. The Kasiski Method for Periodic Ciphers
     XV. Miscellaneous Phases of Vigenère Decryptment
    XVI. Auto-Encipherment
   XVII. Some Periodic Number-Ciphers
  XVIII. Periodic Ciphers with Mixed Alphabets
    XIX. Polyalphabetical Encipherment Applied by Groups
     XX. Vigenère with Key-Progression
    XXI. Polygram Substitution — The Playfair Cipher
   XXII. Highlights of Fractional Substitution
  XXIII. Investigating the Unknown Cipher
  Appendix
         English Frequency and Sequence Data
         Comparative Table of Single-Letter Frequencies
         Chart Showing Normal Contact Percentages (by F. R. Carter)
         Chart Showing Frequencies of English Digrams (by O. Phelps Meaker)
         Some Foreign Language Data
         Bibliography (by W. D. Witt)
         The Commonest English Words (by Frank R. Fraprie)
         English Trigrams (by Frank R. Fraprie)
         English Digrams (by Frank R. Fraprie)
  Index




CHAPTER I
General Information

The subject which we are about to study is the analysis and solution
of _cipher_, though not including _code_, which is a very special
form of cipher demanding something more than elementary knowledge;
nor shall we enter at all into the subject of _invisible inks_,
certainly a most important aspect of secret writing, but belonging
to the province of chemistry rather than to that of cryptanalysis.
_Cipher machines_, also, are not within our present scope.

The term _cipher_ implies a _method_, or _system_, of secret
writing which, generally speaking, is unlimited in scope; it should
be possible, using any one given cipher, to transform any _plaintext_
whatever, regardless of its length and the language in which it is
written, into a _cryptogram_, or single enciphered message. The
process of accomplishing this transformation is called _encipherment_;
the opposite process, that of transforming the cryptogram into a
plaintext, is called _decipherment_.

The word _decrypt_, with its various derivatives, is being used here
to signify the process of _solving_ and reading cryptograms without
any previous knowledge as to their _keys_, or secret formulas; thus
the word _decipher_ has been left to convey only its one meaning, as
mentioned above: the mechanical process of applying a known key. Our
word _decrypt_, however, is an innovation borrowed from the modern
French and Italian writers, and is somewhat frowned upon by leading
cryptologists.

The word _digram_ is being used to indicate a two-letter sequence;
similarly, we have _trigrams_, _tetragrams_, _pentagrams_, etc., to
indicate sequences of three, four, five, etc. letters.

  * * *

Ciphers, in general, fall into three major classifications:

  1. Concealment Cipher
  2. Transposition Cipher
  3. Substitution Cipher

Minor types, such as “abbreviation,” are sometimes included, though,
to the writer, these have never seemed to be truly of a cryptographic
nature.

In _concealment cipher_, the true letters of the secret message are
hidden, or disguised, by any device whatever; and this type of
cipher, as a general rule, is intended to pass without being
suspected as the conveyor of a secret communication.

In _transposition cipher_, the true letters of the secret message
are taken out of their text-order, and are rearranged according to
any pattern, or _key_, agreed upon by the correspondents.

In _substitution cipher_, these original text-letters are replaced
with substitutes, or cipher-symbols, and these symbols are arranged
in the same order as their originals. There may, of course, be
combinations of types, or combinations of several forms belonging to
a single type.

  * * *

The aristocrat of the cipher family is _code_. This is a form of
the substitution cipher which requires the preparation, in advance,
of a _code book_. A series of terms likely to be used in future
correspondence (that is, words, phrases, and even sentences) is first
gathered into a vocabulary, or  “dictionary”; and beside each of these
terms is placed a substitute known as a _code group_, or _code word_.
These substitutes may be groups of letters, or groups of digits, or
actual words selected from ordinary language. Very common words or
expressions are usually provided with more than one substitute; and
nearly always there are substitutes provided for syllables and single
letters, so as to take care of all words not originally included in
the vocabulary.

No code presents any real security unless the code symbols have been
assigned in a thoroughly haphazard manner. This means that any really
good code would have to be printed in two separate sections. In one
of these, the vocabulary terms would be arranged in alphabetical
order, so that they could be readily found when enciphering (_encoding_)
messages; but the code groups would be in mixed order and hard to
find. In the other section, the code groups would be rearranged in
straight alphabetical (or numerical) order, so as to be readily found
when deciphering (_decoding_), and the vocabulary terms would be
in mixed order. Just what is meant can be seen in Fig. 1, showing
fragments from an imaginary code book.


                                Figure 1

        ENCIPHERMENT SECTION                   DECIPHERMENT SECTION

  Vocabulary Term    Code Symbol           Code Symbol  Vocabulary Term

  A                  9001, 2114, 3000*     1120        Assenting to your
  Aachen             8463                  1121        Horse
  About              1119, 0034*           1122        Meet me
  About time for     5434                  1123*       Come;   Paris
  Armored car        1125                  1124        Th-
  Assenting to your  1120                  1125        Armored car

  *)  When a plaintext term has more than one symbol, these are called
  homophones.  Polyphones are symbols which may have more than one meaning.
  The terms _encoding_, _decoding_ are usually preferred to _enciphering_, _deciphering_.


A code of this kind, with symbols assigned _absolutely at random_,
provided it is carefully used (never without re-encipherment) and a
close guard kept over the code books, represents perhaps the maximum
of security to be attained in cryptographic correspondence; and
security, of course, is of prime importance in the selection of a
cipher for any practical purpose.

But in considering the relative merits of the various ciphers, it
is always necessary to take into account many factors other than
security, each cipher being evaluated in connection with the purpose
for which it is wanted: Under what conditions must the encipherment
and decipherment take place? How must the cryptograms be transmitted?
How much of the enciphered correspondence is likely to be intercepted?
What _degree_ of security, after all, is absolutely imperative?

A commercial, or other, firm, having a permanent base of operations,
and in little danger of being blown to bits by an enemy shell, would
not consider the first of these questions from the same angle as the
War Department, and the War Department, though considering all of
them from several different angles of its own, would still not
consider them from the same viewpoint as the State Department.

If messages are to be sent by mail, or by hand, or by telephone,
or pasted on a billboard, it is conceivable that a cipher which
doubles or trebles their length could still be a practical cipher.
For transmission by telephone, the presumption is that the cryptogram
must be pronounceable, or, certainly, audible. For written
communication, individual purposes have been served by means of
pictures.

But when the cryptograms are to be sent by wire or radio, it must
be possible to convert them into Morse symbols, either letters or
figures, but not intermingled letters and figures. Here, length
must be considered, involving questions of time, expense, and the
current telegraphic regulations. Moreover, it is conceded that a
meaningless text will not be transmitted with absolute accuracy,
and a cryptogram which is to be sent by this means must not be of
such a nature that ordinary errors of transmission will render it
unintelligible at the receiving office.

A factor of particularly grave importance in the selection of a
cipher to fit a given purpose is the probable amount of enciphered
material which is going to fall into the possession of unauthorized
persons. A criminal, who has had to send but one brief cryptogram
in a lifetime, might reasonably expect that it will remain forever
unread, no matter how weak the cipher. A commercial firm, transmitting
thousands of words over the air, is more vulnerable; and the diplomatic
office, or the newspaper office, which makes the mistake of publishing
almost verbatim the translations of cryptograms which have been
transmitted by radio, and thus has surely furnished the cipher
expert with a _cryptogram and its translation_, might just as well
have presented him with a copy of its code book.

As to just what constitutes the “perfect” cipher, perhaps it might
be said that this description fits any cipher whatever which provides
the degree of security wanted for an individual purpose, and which
is suited in other respects to that individual purpose. Even a
basically weak cipher, in the hands of an expert, can be made to
serve its purpose; and the strongest can be made useless when
improperly used.

In the present text, we are likely to be found looking at ciphers
largely from a military angle, which, apparently, has a more general
interest than any other. In time of war, the cryptographic service,
that is, the encipherment and transmitting service, is suddenly
expanded to include a large number of new men, many of whom know
nothing whatever of _cryptanalysis_, or the science of decryptment.
Many of these are criminally careless through ignorance, so that,
entirely aside from numerous other factors (including espionage),
it is conceded by the various War Departments that no matter what
system or apparatus is selected for cipher purposes, the enemy, soon
after the beginning of operations, will be in full possession of
details concerning this system, and will have secured a duplicate
of any apparatus or machine. For that reason, the secrecy of messages
must depend upon a changeable key added to a sound basic cipher.

Speed in encipherment and decipherment is desirable, and often urgent;
and the conditions under which these operations must often take place
are conducive to a maximum of error. The ideal cipher, under these
conditions, would be one which is simple in operation, preferably
requiring no written memoranda or apparatus which cannot be quickly
destroyed and reconstructed from memory, and having a key which is
readily changed, easily communicated, and easily remembered. Yet the
present tendency, in all armies, seems to be toward the use of small
changeable _codes_, which are written (printed) documents; and, for
certain purposes, small mechanical devices.

An enormous number of military cryptograms will be transmitted by
radio and taken down by enemy listeners, and even the ordinary wire
will be tapped. It is expected that the enemy will intercept dozens,
and even hundreds, of cryptograms in a single day, some of which will
inevitably be enciphered with the same key. With so much material,
knowing the general subject matter, and often exactly what words to
expect, or the personal expressions invariably used by individuals,
it is conceded that he will read the messages. All that is desired
of a cryptogram is that it will resist his efforts for a sufficient
length of time to render its contents valueless when he finally
discovers them. By that time, of course, the key will have been
changed, probably several times, and even the cipher.

With these general facts understood, we may first dispose hastily
of the concealment cipher, after which we will examine at greater
length the two legitimate types, the transpositions and the
substitutions.




CHAPTER II
Concealment Devices

Concealment writing may take a host of forms. Perhaps its oldest known
application is found in the ancient device of writing a secret message
on the shaved head of a slave and dispatching the slave with his
communication after his growing hair had covered the writing. Or, if
this appears a little incredible, the ancients have left us records
of another device considerably more practical: that of writing the
secret message on a wooden tablet, covering this with a wax coating,
and writing a second message on top of the first.

In the middle ages we meet a development called _puncture cipher_;
any piece of printed matter, such as a public proclamation, serves
as the vehicle, and the cipher consists simply in punching holes with
a pin under certain letters, so that these letters, read in regular
order, will convey the desired information. It is said that this kind
of concealment writing was resorted to in England at a comparatively
recent period, to avoid the payment of postage. Postage on letters
was very high, while newspapers were permitted to travel free, and
the correspondents sent their messages very handily by punching holes
under the letters printed in newspapers. Where the sender of a message
may also control the preparation of the printed vehicle, any desired
letters can be pointed out by the use of special type forms, misspelled
words, accidental gaps, and so on.

But concealment cipher is not necessarily confined to written and
printed matter. Ohaver, in his “Solving Cipher Secrets,” demonstrated
the conveyance of messages in the shapes and sizes of stones in a
garden wall, or in the arrangement of colored candies in a box; and
we read, in fiction, of many similar devices, such as a series of
knots tied in a string, or beads strung in imitation of the rosary.
Again, we hear of cases in which the arrangement of stamps on
envelopes is made to represent the terms of a miniature code. All
such devices are, of course, combination-cipher rather than pure
concealment, since the stones, candies, and so on, must first be
made the substitutes for letters or code terms.

A method of pure concealment, said to have been used by Cardinal
Richelieu, involved the use of a _grille_. Grilles are made of
cardboard, sheet-metal, or other flat material, and are perforated
with any desired number, size, and arrangement of openings. The
Richelieu grille, of approximately the same size and shape as the
paper used for correspondence, could be laid over a sheet of paper
so as to reveal only certain portions, and the secret message was
written on these. The grille was then removed and the rest of the
sheet was filled in with extraneous matter in such a way as to present
a seemingly continuous text. The legitimate recipient of this message,
having a duplicate grille, simply laid this grille over the sheet
of paper, and read his message through the apertures.

Concealment cipher goes by various names, as _null cipher_,
_open-letter cipher_, _conventional writing_, _dissimulated writing_,
and so on, not always with a difference in meaning, though
“conventional writing” does convey somewhat the idea of a tiny
code. (In this, casual words have special meanings.)

The name “null cipher” derives from the fact that in any given
cryptogram the greater portion of the letters are null, a certain
few being significant, and perhaps a few others being significant
only in that they act as indicators for finding truly significant
letters. To illustrate what is usually meant: Say that your very
good friend, Smith, first complains about a radio which he has
bought from your neighbor, Johnson, then asks you to take Johnson
the following note: “Having trouble about loudspeaker. Believe
antenna connected improperly, but do whatever you can.” By reading
the final letter of each word, you will find out what Smith actually
had to say to Johnson: GET READY TO RUN.

That is the null cipher reduced to its elements, though naturally it
can be more skillfully applied. Significant letters may be concealed
in an infinite variety of ways. The key, as here, may be their
positions in words, or in the text as a whole. It may be their
distance from one another, expressed in letters or in inches, or
their distance to the left or right of certain other letters
(indicators) or of punctuation marks (indicators); and this distance,
or position, need not be constant, or regular. Sometimes it is
governed by an irregular series of numbers.

Similar devices are applied to whole words. We agree, say, that in
whatever communications we send to our accomplice, only the third
word of each sentence is to be significant. Desiring to send him the
order, STRIKE NOW, we write him as follows: “The building _strike_ is
worrying our friends quite a lot. It has _now_ extended to this part
of the city.”

A purely concealment cipher may be enveloped in apparent ciphers of
other types. The true message is concealed, as usual, in a dummy
message, and the whole is enciphered in one of the legitimate systems.
It is then hoped that the decryptor, satisfied with having solved the
dummy, will look no further. Even more effective would be the device
of concealing the message in what appears to be a cryptogram, but is
not. It is easy to string letters together in such a way as to make
them resemble most convincingly a transposition cryptogram, and in
this case it would be hoped that the investigator’s full attention
would be given to the hopeless task of decrypting the dummy.

Concerning the decryptment of concealment cipher, we regret to say
that cryptanalysis has little help to offer. Fortunately, most of
these ciphers depend absolutely on the belief that they will not be
recognized as cipher, and once they are so recognized, they present
no resistance. In those few cases where the secret message is not
at once obvious, it is sometimes useful to arrange the words (or
sentences) in columns, or in rows, for a closer inspection.


     Figure 2

  I N S P E C T
  D E T A I L S
  F O R
  T R I G L E T H
  A C K N O W L E D G E
  T H E
  B O N D S
  F R O M
  F E W E L L


We have, for instance, an apparent memorandum in which the
awkwardness of the wording, or some other factor, has drawn our
attention to the possibility of cipher: “Inspect details for
Trigleth — acknowledge the bonds from Fewell.” We arrange these
words in column form, aligned by their initials, as in Fig. 2, and
the third column promptly gives up the secret message STRIKE NOW.

The words of sentences can, of course, be treated in the same way,
and where the alignment from the left gives no results, letters or
words can be aligned from the right, or from the center. If columns
give no results, diagonals can be inspected, or a zig-zagging line
between one column and another.

Experience counts for most, and extensive reading is a vast help.
Having seen methods in use, or read the descriptions of methods,
we know of some definite thing to look for. Then, too, some of the
concealment ciphers have transposition characteristics. This would
be the case with the Legrand cipher, which is of the type called
“open letter.”

This cipher used a numerical key, which, in turn, was based on a
keyword in what seems today a rather odd manner: A keyword CAT, made
up of the 3d, 1st, and 20th letters of the alphabet, gives the key
3 1 2 0. Before concealment takes place, a series of word-positions
is marked off, and these vacant places are numbered (0 to 9, or 9 to
0), continuing to repeat the ten digits until there are enough of the
digits 3, 1, 2, and 0 to accommodate the words of the secret message.
This message is then written, word by word, below its digits,
beginning with the first digit 3, then going on to find a digit 1,
then a digit 2, then a digit 0, then another digit 3, and so on.
After the secret message is written into its place, all of the blank
positions are filled with connective matter, as in the case of
Cardinal Richelieu’s grille-writing. Our later study of
transpositions will show approximately how we should go about
reading this, once we suspect its use.

So far, we have been considering pure concealment. Many of the
classic ciphers, fundamentally of the concealment type, are also
substitution ciphers, and their decryptment would follow substitution
methods. Of these, perhaps the best known is Bacon’s biliteral
cipher, summed up in Fig. 3.


                 Figure 3

        BACON'S BI-LITERAL ALPHABET

  A   aaaaa      IJ   abaaa       R   baaaa
  B   aaaab       K   abaab       S   baaab
  C   aaaba       L   ababa       T   baaba
  D   aaabb       M   ababb      UV   baabb
  E   aabaa       N   abbaa       W   babaa
  F   aabab       O   abbab       X   babab
  G   aabba       P   abbba       Y   babba
  H   aabbb       Q   abbbb       Z   babbb

     S      T      R      I      K      E
   baaab  baaba  baaaa  abaaa  abaab  aabaa

               N      O      W
             abbaa  abbab  babaa

  Hold OFf uNtIl you hEar frOm mE agAin.  wE
               May cOMpROmIse.


Lord Bacon’s cipher presupposes that the encipherer may so control
the preparation of his published work that he may prescribe the type
to be used for each printed letter, and it is claimed that he
actually used his cipher for the preservation of historical secrets,
including that of his own parentage. Two fonts of type are required,
the letters of one font differing (very slightly) from those of the
other font. These we may speak of as the _A_-font and the _B_-font,
and each letter of the alphabet is given a substitute composed of
_A_’s and _B_’s, as shown in full in the figure. Before a message,
as STRIKE NOW, can be concealed, it must be expressed in _A_’s and
_B_’s, five of these for each of its letters, as shown, so that a
message of 9 letters attains a length of 45. For its concealment, we
may use any text whatever whose length is 45 letters, for instance,
one whose obvious meaning is the contrary of the secret one: “Hold
off until you hear from me again. We may compromise.” The first five
letters, _HOLDO_, are to represent _S_, the next five, _FFUNT_, are
to represent _T_, and so on; and the sole purpose of the _A_’s and
_B_’s is to point out the kind of type which must be used in printing
the corresponding letters. In the encipherment of the figure, letters
taken from the _A_-font are indicated by lower-case and those of
the _B_-font by capitals, though it is understood that no such
emphatic difference is contemplated in the cipher.

While the average modern person would have no opportunity for
employing Lord Bacon’s cipher as described, he has access to an
unlimited number of vehicles other than type-difference. Anything,
in fact, may serve the purpose, so long as the material is available
in two distinguishable forms and in sufficient quantity. Our message
of 29 _A_’s and 16 _B_’s could be expressed with a deck of playing
cards if aces and face-cards are considered to represent _B_’s. It
could assume the form of a fence with 45 palings, in which the
_B_-palings are crooked, damaged, or missing. Ohaver once made use
of a cartridge belt in which the _A_-loops contained cartridges and
the _B_-loops were empty. There is an excellent opportunity here,
too, for the compiling of “fake” cryptograms, with _A_-letters and
_B_-letters distinguished as vowels and consonants, or by the part
of the normal alphabet from which they have been taken.

With a biliteral or binumeral alphabet which requires 26 groups, we
cannot have fewer than five characters to the group without making
groups of different lengths. But another well-known cipher alphabet,
devised by the Abbé Trithème for use in much the same way, is
triformed, and thus permits that the group-length be reduced to
three. The Trithème (Trithemius; Trittemius) alphabet, expressed in
digits 1-2-3, was approximately that shown in Fig. 4.


                Figure 4

         A TRI-NUMERAL ALPHABET

  A   111        J   211        S   311
  B   112        K   212        T   312
  C   113        L   213        U   313
  D   121        M   221        V   321
  E   122        N   222        W   322
  F   123        O   223        X   323
  G   131        P   231        Y   331
  H   132        Q   232        Z   332
  I   133        R   233        &   333


This alphabet has had many applications, including the use of colored
candy previously mentioned. One contributor to Ohaver’s column
submitted a cryptogram of the open-letter type in which the digits
1, 2, 3, were indicated in the _number of syllables_ of the
successive words. A sentence, “Can you be sure of sufficient
assistance from Mayberry?” indicates the digits 1 1 1, 1 1 3, 3 1 3;
and, if the alphabet of Fig. 4 is the one in use, represents the
letters _A C U_. This is of particular interest in that it is easily
done without involving the awkward turns of language that so often
betray the concealment cipher. (This same contributor, a Mr. Levine,
evolved another cipher, accomplished by an arithmetical process, by
which it was possible to make a cryptogram convey two separate
messages!)

Many writers have shown alphabets of the biform and triform types
applied to open-letter communications by making the significant
factor the _number of vowels_ contained in successive words. Thus,
the sentence given above yields a series 1, 3, 1, 2, 1, 4, 4, 1, 4.
Using a biform alphabet, these are usually considered simply as odd
and even; with a triform alphabet, some disposition must be made
of numbers larger than 3.

The subject is fascinating, and the literature of cryptography is
rich with examples. However, we need not delve further into what,
after all, is only the stepchild of a legitimate science. The matter
of telegraphic transmission alone will bar these ciphers for most
general purposes, or the fact that a cipher once betrayed will never
serve again. Then, too, the censorship combats it by cutting out or
rearranging or changing words, causing the open letter (or telegram)
to convey only the information which it purports to convey.

Concealment cipher has, of course, the unique virtue of being able
to convey messages under circumstances which make it seem that no
communication has passed, and we have hardly touched upon the fact
that the short message, prior to its concealment, may have been a
well-enciphered one. But we rather suspect that, for the end desired,
invisible inks are more convenient and practical.


1.  By PICCOLA.

On peut être Napoleon sans être son ami, mes enfants!

2.  By B. NATURAL.

FOR SALE:  Spring coats.  All fine Scotch serge, for ensembles.  Stoat 
trimmed, fashioned right.  Black shirred lining, striped.  Effective for 
brides.  Act quickly. - Abraham Batz, 522 Broad, Telephone Exchange 7104-R.

3.  By TITOGI.

How about releasing Tony, the gang chief?  He don't lie, and is not the 
true slayer either.  Let us be friends.  I am all right.  Ed Lehr.

4.  By TRYIT.

To those friends considering, it is always news, but all filled ciphers 
disturb happiness with varied answers!

5.  By PICCOLA.

Do not send for any supplies before Monday, at earliest.  Order once only, 
as men in charge are feeling sore about your threat to encourage the 
mutiny at Ford's. - Wilson.

6.  By PICCOLA.  (Why not, indeed?)

A W I T H   A N Y S E   N D F O R   I T Y O U   M U S T B   E F E A R 
T H E C A   N H I T T   R Y A B O   U R E O U   T I S E C   H I Y O U 
A N D M Y   T I O N C   U P C R E   A S K T O   C A N D Q.




CHAPTER III
Transposition Types

Transposition has already been explained as a form of cipher in which
the letters of a message are disarranged from their natural order in
accordance with any pattern, or key, agreeable to the correspondents.
The fact that _any_ plan may be followed will suggest the possible
ramifications as to detail. Transpositions are, in fact, found in
every conceivable degree of complexity. They are not even unanimous
in their demand that there be two separate operations in the
preparation of a cryptogram: (1) the writing down of the plaintext
letters, and (2) the taking off of these letters.

Generally speaking, these ciphers follow two types, the regular
(geometrical, symmetrical), and the irregular. The strictly
geometrical type, sometimes called _complete-unit_ transposition,
is based on one comparatively small _unit_, or _cycle_, repeated
over and over, every unit having exactly the same number of letters
and exactly the same disarrangement as the rest. This type always
demands an exact number of units, and when a plaintext message is
not evenly divisible into units, it must either be cut down to fit,
or lengthened by the addition of extra letters called _nulls_. Some
of these keys are actual geometrical figures, such as triangles,
diamonds, hexagons, etc., or conventional designs like crosses. Any
figure of this kind provides a number of cells, or points, for the
_writing in_ of letters, and thus will serve as a mnemonic device,
or key.


                         Figure 5

          A   D      E   H      I   L      M   P
            X          X          X          X
          B   C      F   G      J   K      N   O

  Plaintext message:   A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P.

  Cryptogram (a)    A D B C E   H F G I L   J K M P N   O.

  Cryptogram (b)    A D E H I   L M P B C   F G J K N   O.


The two operations of writing-in and taking off may be governed by
any agreed ruling, though the second of these must be made to result
in five-letter groups if the cryptogram is to be transmitted by wire
or radio. Fig. 5, in which an imaginary message has been represented
as _A B C D E_ . . . . . , shows only one of the many ways in which a
simple cross could be used as the key for the writing-in operation,
together with only two of the many cryptograms which could be taken
off from this one arrangement. This figure shows also, in its two
cryptograms (a) and (b), two fundamentally different plans for the
taking off of transpositions. The unit here is 4, the first unit
containing the letters _A B C D_, the next unit _E F G H_, and so
on. In cryptogram (a), the letters of every unit are still standing
together in a group, while in cryptogram (b), the letters of any one
unit have been mixed with letters of other units. In this latter
case, the two correspondents will have to agree upon a certain
number of crosses per line; otherwise, they run the risk of having
to decrypt each other’s cryptograms.

The most popular of the geometrical figures appears to be the square,
with or without a series of numbers 1 to 25, 1 to 36, and so on. Any
device or game, which will provide a square, is likely to be seized
upon as the source of a transposition key. We find two widely-known
examples of this in the “magic square” and the “knight’s tour.”

A _magic square_, as most of us understand this term, is made up of
a series of numbers, such as 1 to 25, 1 to 36, which are so arranged
in their cells (positions) that the added numbers of any row, column,
or diagonal, will always give the same total. A square of given size
will provide more than one magic square arrangement; and these
numbers, being a series, constitute an _order_, which, once it can
be remembered or reconstructed, will serve either for writing in or
for taking off a unit of 25, 36, etc., letters.

The _knight’s tour_ is based on the chessboard, a unit of 64 cells.
In the game of chess, where each piece has certain prescribed moves,
the piece called the knight must move diagonally across a 2 x 3
oblong. The “tour” consists in starting the knight at one corner and
carrying him completely over the 64 cells of the chessboard, causing
him to touch every square exactly once without having made any other
move than the one allotted to him. Fig. 6 will show one of the many
such tours which have been published. Such designs will serve either
for writing in or for taking out. In either case, the text is made to
contain exactly 64 letters or a multiple thereof. For writing in, the
first letter is placed in the cell corresponding to No. 1, the next
letter in the cell numbered 2, and so on. For puzzle purposes, the 64
letters are usually left standing in the form of a square. As cipher,
they would be taken off, by rows, or by columns, or otherwise. Or the
64 letters may first be written in simple order into the form of a
square, and then taken out one by one following the route of the
knight.


            Figure 6

   1   4  53  18  55   6  43  20

  52  17   2   5  38  19  56   7

   3  64  15  54  31  42  21  44

  16  51  28  39  34  37   8  57

  63  14  35  32  41  30  45  22

  50  27  40  29  36  33  58   9

  13  62  25  48  11  60  23  46

  26  49  12  61  24  47  10  59


Other ciphers of the regular type merely employ a unit of so many
letters, to be arranged in some specified order, generally in
accordance with a numerical key. If, say, the unit has a length of
six letters, which we will represent as _A B C D E F_, and the
specified order for these is 6 2 1 4 3 5, this unit may be transposed
to read _F B A D C E_. Each unit will be transposed to have exactly
this pattern, except that semi-occasionally we find a final unit
slightly different from the others, owing to the fact that nulls
were not added to complete its length (Accurately speaking, this
transfers the cipher to the “irregular” class). Units, once transposed
in this way, may continue to stand intact, one after another; or they
may remain intact, merely exchanging places with one another; or the
cipher may be so planned that they do not remain intact, as was the
case with our cryptogram (b) of Fig. 5.

Often, two ciphers will differ from each other only in the method
by which their cryptograms are produced; oftener, there will be an
actual difference, but one which is purely superficial. For instance,
we have just mentioned a plaintext unit _A B C D E F_ as having been
transposed with a key 6 2 1 4 3 5 to result in the order _F B A D C E_.
Identically the same numerical key, used in another way, will
transpose this unit in the order _C B E D F A_. The two resulting
cryptograms would be different, but the _kind_ of cryptogram would not.

An extremely common form of complete-unit transposition is that
indicated in Fig. 7, where a short message, LET US HEAR FROM YOU AT
ONCE CONCERNING JEWELS QQ (38 letters plus 2 _nulls_), has been
written into an oblong, or _block_, in one order and taken off in
another. Both the writing in and the taking off follow a _route_,
rather than a key and, for that reason, the cipher is often spoken
of as _route transposition_, rather than _rectangular transposition_.

Three of the many possible _routes_ are shown in the three (partial)
cryptograms of the figure. In this connection, the American popular
terminology seems to favor _horizontals_ and _verticals_, rather than
“rows” and “columns.” The writing in or the taking out of a text is
said to be done by _straight horizontals_, or by _reversed horizontals_
(backward), or by _alternate_ (or _alternating_) _horizontals_
(written alternately in both directions). Similarly, we find ascending,
or descending, or _alternate verticals_; and again the _diagonal_
routes will be described as _ascending_, _descending_, or _alternate_.
The route may also be a _spiral_ one, and in this case it is said to
be _clockwise_ or _counter-clockwise_.


                                    Figure 7

  L  E  T  U  S                              Cryptograms:
  H  E  A  R  F
  R  O  M  Y  O        (a)  By descending verticals, from the left:   L H R U C
  U  A  T  O  N
  C  E  C  O  N             C N E E E   O A E E G   L T A M T   C R J S U, etc.
  C  E  R  N  I
  N  G  J  E  W        (b)  By alternating verticals from the right, top:
  E  L  S  Q  Q
                            S F O N N   I W Q Q E   N O O Y R   U T A M T, etc.

  (c)  By diagonals:  L H E R E   T U O A U   C A M R S   C E T Y F   N E C O O, etc.


For all of these routes, the point of beginning is nearly always one
of the four corners, except in the case of the two _spiral_ routes,
which are just as likely to begin with a central letter, particularly
when the rectangle is a square. Colonel Parker Hitt, in his _Manual
for the Solution of Military Ciphers_, shows the same series of
letters written into forty different blocks, always beginning at one
of the four corners.

Rectangular transposition, when used as cipher and not simply as a
puzzle, requires that one dimension of the oblong be fixed, the other
dimension being entirely dependent on the length of the message to be
conveyed. In the figure, the pre-arranged width of the block, called
its _key-length_, was 5, and the filling of the block required 8
complete units. These were written one by one as simple bits of
plaintext, and were then broken up in the method of taking off.
Occasionally it will be the vertical dimension of the block which is
fixed, and the plaintext will be written in by columns, beginning at
the left or at the right. But there is so little difference in the
results of the two procedures that a decryptor may solve and read a
cryptogram without learning which of the two was actually followed.
Ordinarily, it is the simple operation which comes first, the writing
in of intact units one after another. Sometimes the opposite is true,
the operation of writing in being made very complex, so that the
whole block is the unit, the taking off being done by simple rows
or columns. Frequently both operations are complex. This kind of
transposition belongs rather to the category of puzzles than to
cipher; any reasonably intelligent person can decrypt it, knowing
what it is. However, it has not infrequently been applied to serious
purposes, and a decryptor, encountering an unknown transposition,
would not overlook the possibility of simple rectangular encipherment.

Decryptment, here, is merely a matter of trying out the known routes,
and it would never be actually necessary to write out the entire
forty-plus blocks, or even half of these, for any one rectangle.
The decryptor begins by counting the letters of his cryptogram and
factoring the number of these, to find out what oblongs are possible.
A 36-letter cryptogram, for instance, might mean dimensions 6 x 6,
or dimensions 4 x 9. It could, conceivably, represent dimensions
3 x 12, or 2 x 18. But key-lengths are hardly ever shorter than 5,
or as long as 18. He would seize upon the square as the object of
his first investigation, writing the cryptogram into that block by
various known routes, and also _reading_ by various known routes,
diagonally, horizontally, vertically, backward, or upside down,
until he begins to find words. As a rule, this does not take him
very long; often the very efforts of an encipherer to achieve
complexity will result in an easier task for the decryptor. However,
a spiral will sometimes give trouble.


                       Figure 8

          A       E       I
            B   D   F   H   J
              C       G       K........etc.

  Taken off:  A E I & B   D F H J &   C G K...


The examples appended to this chapter are all of the complete-unit
type, and require little knowledge of cryptanalysis for their
solution.

Passing on to irregular types, we find these in all degrees of
difficulty, from the very simple “rail fence” to the formidable
“U. S. Army” double transposition.

The “rail fence” family is outlined sketchily in Fig. 8. The writing
in of the plaintext follows a zig-zag route, downward by so many
letters, then upward to the line of beginning, as indicated by the
series _A B C_ . . . . . , and the taking off of the cryptogram is
done by straight lines. In explanation of the character _&_,
this has been used here as a signal to show the ends of the straight
lines. No such signal is needed if a proper understanding exists
between correspondents as to the construction of the “fence” and the
length of it which may occupy one line of writing; and in some cases
the straight lines are all equal in length.

In Fig. 9, we have a suggested _grille-transposition_, of a kind
described by Mario Zanotti as “indefinite.” This kind of grille, we
believe, is the invention of General Sacco. To picture it complete,
we may imagine a flat surface, such as a piece of cardboard, marked
off into squares, having dimensions 12 x 6, and turned sidewise.
Assuming this to be shown in full, we are looking at 12 _columns_,
and each column has 6 of the small squares, or cells. To convert this
piece of cardboard into an encipherment grille, we clip out three
squares from each one of its 12 columns, always in the most haphazard
manner possible. The resulting grille will thus have 36 openings,
and, if placed over a sheet of paper (preferably also marked into
cells), enables us to transpose the first 36 letters of a message by
writing them one at a time into the 36 apertures in some one order
and taking them off in another. The original plan was the reverse of
the usual: write the letters by columns and take them off by rows.


         Figure 9

   [      (N)       ...
   [(S)   (O)   ( ) ...
   [(T)(I)   ( )( ) ...
   [   (K)          ...
   [(R)(E)   ( )    ...
   [      (W)( )( ) ...

  Cryptogram:    N S O T I   K R E W.


In the figure, a 9-letter message, STRIKE NOW, has been written into
the first three columns of such a grille, and, taken off by rows,
comes out in the order _N_, _SO_, _TI_, _K_, _RE_, _W_. While the
figure shows this cryptogram regrouped in the usual fives, the
original method, as prescribed with the device, would have grouped
it in threes, that is, to correspond with the number of apertures per
column. This would facilitate the operation of decipherment, which is
as follows: Count the number of letters in the cryptogram _and divide
this number by 3_, in order to find how many columns were used. Cover
(or ignore) the unused portion of the grille, write the cryptogram by
straight horizontals into the uncovered portion, then read, or copy,
by descending verticals. The recipient of the present cryptogram,
for instance, finds nine letters, divides this number by 3, thus
ascertaining that three columns were used, covers up the other nine
columns, then, proceeding by straight horizontals, places one
cryptogram-letter wherever he sees a hole. Having thus restored all
letters to their proper columns, he has the plaintext message before
him. It will be noticed that an encipherer uses only the number of
columns that he needs. His last column does not have to be completed
with nulls, as in the case of complete-unit ciphers.

As this grille has just been described, its full capacity is 36
letters, and it has a repeating cycle of that length, presuming
that, after the transposition of the first 36 letters, another
36-letter unit is to be transposed by the same grille standing in
the same position. But this grille, reversed, provides a new pattern;
and the opposite side of the grille provides two additional patterns.
These positions may be numbered, thus providing for the encipherment
of 144 letters, even assuming that the positions are to be used in
1, 2, 3, 4 order and without varying the method of use. Add to this
that the cryptographic offices may have provided half-a-dozen
different grilles to be used interchangeably and not always in
exactly the same way, and it becomes plain that such an encipherment,
in the hands of an operator who knows his business, could be made
to furnish a very effective form of transposition.


        Figure 10

  2 1 L E T U S H E A R

  5 4 3 2 1 F R O M Y O

  0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 U

  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 A T O N

  3 2 1 C E C O N C E R

  4 3 2 1 N I N G J E W

  7 6 5 4 3 2 1 E L S Q


Zanotti, and others, have also described mechanical devices of a
patentable type for accomplishing very involved transpositions. The
principle on which most of these operate can be seen in Fig. 10. A
certain number of pointers, or narrow sliding rulers, all carrying
the same progression of numbers, are so attached to a framework that
they can be set, by means of a numerical key, to project at irregular
lengths over a sheet of quadrille paper cut to fit into the frame.
Thus, each pointer indicates a certain number of empty cells, as
nine on the first line, six on the next, and so on. In the example
of the figure, presuming that each pointer carries only ten numbers,
and that the full number of these pointers is seven, the numerical
key would be the column of numbers at the extreme left:
2-5-0-7-3-4-7. The message here is written in the usual horizontals,
with a null (not strictly necessary) completing the last line. It
could be taken off by columns: _L_, _EC_, _TEN_, _UFCI_, etc. The
decipherer, having a duplicate apparatus, would set this according
to the pre-arranged key, copy the cryptogram by columns, and read
it by rows. The exact method, of course, can be varied.

Some attempt has been made, too, to evolve cipher machines which will
produce effective transpositions, but our understanding is that these
have never been accepted as worthwhile. The accomplishment of
transposition by mechanical means is far from new. In fact, the
oldest transposition cipher of which we have any record was
accomplished by means of the Lacedaemonian _scytale_. The Spartan
general, departing for foreign conquests, carried with him a rod,
or scytale, of exactly the same diameter as one retained by the
administration. When it was desired to communicate matter of a
confidential nature, the sender, using a narrow strip of parchment,
wound this carefully around his scytale with edges meeting uniformly
at all points, and wrote his message lengthwise of the rod. When the
strip was unrolled, the message appeared as a series of short
disconnected fragments, one letter, or two letters, or portions of
one or two letters. It was presumed that no person would be able to
read the message without being possessed of a duplicate scytale on
which to rewind the strip. We are left to suppose that this
presumption was justified by fact, though the decryptor of today
would make short work of such a system. The scytale, we believe,
is the oldest known cipher of any kind, and is still serving today
as the emblem of the _American Cryptogram Association_.

Before leaving types, it should be mentioned that any of the
transpositions ordinarily used for disarranging single letters can
also be used for the transposal of entire words. The popular name
for this is “Route Cipher” — possibly because it is rather cumbersome
to accomplish by any other than a “route” transposition.

We have said little concerning _decipherment_. This, in practically
all cases, is a mere matter of performing inversely the two
encipherment operations. For either process, the operator begins by
setting down his key or design, or adjusting his mechanical device
in the agreed manner. The encipherer “writes in” a plaintext, and
“takes off” a cryptogram; the decipherer “writes in” a cryptogram,
and “takes off” (or reads) a plaintext. If the encipherer, by
agreement, has written the text in rows and taken it off by columns,
then the decipherer must do the reverse: write his text by columns
and take it off by rows.

Before entering into the subject of _decryptment_, the student should
acquaint himself with the significance of the various tables appended
to this text, in order that he may consult these or similar tables
for information as to _frequencies_, and _sequence_. Every written
language has its individual characteristics in these two respects,
and, to learn just what these are for each language, various
cryptologists have, from time to time, counted the letters, the short
words, the combinations, and so forth, often on extremely long texts,
afterward arranging these data in the form of charts, or tables, or
lists. Two such counts are never duplicates, and there may be a
noticeable difference, say, between results obtained from literary
text and those obtained from military or telegraphic text; yet
results for any one language are surprisingly uniform. Finding, for
instance, an unexplained cryptogram in which a count of the letters
shows that about 40% of these are vowels (with or without _Y_), we
may classify it, not only as a transposition, but as one enciphered
in English or German, since one of the Latin languages can hardly be
written with so low a vowel percentage. Then, if we note the
occurrences of the letter _E_, and find that this makes up about 12%
of the total number of letters, we may discard the possibility of
German, in which the letter _E_ is far more likely to represent 18%
of the text. Or, if the vowel percentage is high enough to point to
one of the Latin languages, French would be distinguished from the
others by the outstanding frequency of its letter _E_, sometimes as
great as that of the German _E_, while the Spanish, Portuguese, or
Italian language will not always show it as the leading letter, its
place having been taken by _A_. In the Serb-Croat language, the
letter _A_ always predominates, and in Russian the letter _O_.

As to sequence, and considering English combinations only, certain
digrams, such as _TH_, _HE_, _AN_, etc., very consistently
predominate over all others. These almost never show identical
percentages in any two digram counts (as the single letters sometimes
will), and seldom, if ever, are ranked in exactly the same order,
aside from the fact that _TH_ invariably comes first. But in all
counts, the same fifty to sixty digrams (out of 676) are always found
at the top of the list. Thus the Meaker digram chart differs from
similar charts made by many others; yet _any_ digram chart is the
most valuable weapon we have for attacking a cipher. The Carter
contact chart contains the same general information expressed in
another way for special use in transpositions. (This was not figured
from the Meaker chart, but from an earlier one by Ohaver, made on the
same kind of text.)

One very useful phase of frequency data is seen in the group
percentages. Single letters, especially in short texts, may vary
greatly from their normal percentages, while certain classes, taken
as a whole, maintain a fairly constant percentage no matter how
short the text. Such classes, or groups, listed under the general
heading of _English Frequency and Sequence Data_, can be memorized
as having roughly approximate percentages: Vowels, 40%; selected
high-frequency consonants, 30%; extreme low-frequency group, 2%;
the five most frequent letters, mixed, 45%; the nine most frequent
letters, 70%. This final group of nine letters, _E T A O N I S R H_,
hardly ever varies appreciably; the shorter groups will sometimes
vary as much as 5% one way or the other.

Very useful in _code_ decryptment is a list of the commonest words.
Trigrams have also been investigated, the favorite positions of
individual letters in their own words, average word-length,
_patterns_, and endless other information, some of which is
indispensable, and some merely convenient. It will not be possible,
in the space at our disposal, to point out all of the uses to which
this kind of information can be put; the student is urged to take
his cue from the occasional short references made in connection with
examples.

  * * *

All ciphers are decrypted by the _general methods_ suitable to their
type, and a transposition cryptogram may involve _factoring_,
_examination of the vowel distribution_, and _anagramming_, either
singly or in combination. These are best explained in connection with
examples, which may themselves have _special methods_, and we have
selected for general discussion four ciphers, two belonging to the
complete-unit type and two to the irregular. A careful study of the
methods used in individual cases should furnish the student with a
basis for analyzing other ciphers and evolving other special methods
to suit particular cases.

Concerning the paper work, which, admittedly, is onerous in most
forms of cipher investigation, much reference may be found, in the
matter which follows, to “paper strips.” These are old stand-bys.
Most decryptors prefer to do all of their work on cross-section
(quadrille) paper, since the writing of the letters into cells
enables them to obtain an accurate spacing both laterally and
vertically, and this paper is easily cut apart along the separating
lines. But for the kind of cryptograms we are likely to see here,
many persons prefer to work with a set of anagram blocks. These can
be prepared at home from cardboard squares, or may be bought in sets
with frequent letters represented in approximately the correct
proportions.


7.  By TITOGI.

T S S N I   H A Y S T   I N T P I   S E R O O   I A A S N.
Also this:  S H C V I   E O L E A   E W E R M.

8.  By G. A. SLIGHT.  (Something found in every school-book - IF found!)

T G H M R   R I A Y E   X N U E E   S D E X S   H M T I D   E Q U O A   Y R O A U 
N P U E T   G T I T E   S Y S N O   A Q N X A   T U A D S   I S H X.

9.  By PICCOLA.

W I N T A   H D A E S   W H L E T   Y L W A I   L H O Q L   A S S S A   S Q.

10.  By NEMO.  (Magic Square).

L E A S U   L T S G M   S L O E I   E O I M E   A R N S A   S R C D E   K I U S U 
H E M A Q   L Y S P R   M E O A.

11.  By THE ADMIRAL.

B S P N T   E A E F T   V V O A N   E Y A P U   Z S E T P   T H M N A   T A E E R 
S D S S K   P S J E S   T Y S E A   L R H I A   S K S N T   T E Y W O   F T H M W 
Y K E F E   N N H C I   E H H U M   I H I T E   O H G E S   U C G D I   O O W E A 
S A S N E   R H M A A   S S L E R   G S M N E   D T H K E   M L U A E   T V M F O 
R A I W P   A Y A M A   E Y A D.

12.  By THE ADMIRAL.

A A F R S   R T N E A   R B N E E   O H S R L   T I A P D   U E O S I   I T T A T 
G L F O T   S O U S H   H E P N Y.

13.  By DAN SURR.  (Received from General Headquarters following a skirmish).

F A A T R   M N O A T   I L V I S   Y G U C F   F I O O E   P S N K L   T O I N V 
R T T O A   H N D N E   E R E N N   B M P U N   P O R R K   A U O M E   A N A I E 
T S S B N   R G T G S   T T I E E   I C T H R.

14.  By PICCOLA.  (This is serious advice!)

F F L T A   A R N I E   U O R N T   O T D L A   N R W S O   I A T T E   Y B A N T 
M E H S K   O G R Z E   P S R E I   O A O A M   S S S M A   L P I L Y   S.

15.  BY FRA-GRANT.  (This might have been a little easier.  Still - ?)

Q Y T E Y   O F U B U   Q E H I H   T E C H T   H S A U A   O N S I T   I T T T I 
E T T E L   L S E A P   L T N T.




CHAPTER IV
Geometrical Types — The Nihilist Transposition

In the preceding chapter, we glanced at the most elementary form of
_columnar transposition_: a text is written into a block by rows and
taken off by columns in such a way that even though all or part of
the columns may be reversed in direction, these columns are always
left standing one after another in regular order. Columnar
transposition becomes less crude when the order for taking off the
columns is an irregular one, governed by a changeable numerical key,
the length of this key governing also the width of the rectangle.
This process can be examined in Fig. 11. In this figure, the
numerical key, 4 1 6 5 3 2 7, was first derived from a _keyword_,
HALIFAX, according to the following very common plan: The two _A_’s,
taken from left to right, receive the first two numbers; the third
number, in the absence of _B_, _C_, _D_, and _E_, is assigned to
_F_; and so on, following the alphabetical rank of the letters
present, and taking repeated letters from left to right. The presence
of seven numbers implies seven columns, and it is said that the
_key-length_ is 7. When a text has been written into a block of
that width, with a key-number standing above each column, these
columns can be taken off in the order shown by the numbers, and not
in regular sequence.


          Figure 11

  Usual Plan for Transposing
           Columns

     H  A  L  I  F  A  X
     4  1  6  5  3  2  7

     L  E  T  U  S  H  E
     A  R  F  R  O  M  Y
     O  U  A  T  O  N  C
     E  C  O  N  C  E  R
     N  I  N  G  J  E  W
     E  L  S  X  X  X  X

  Cryptogram:  E R U C I   L H M N E

  E X S O O   C J X L A   O E N E U, etc.


The key, used exactly as described, is a “taking off” key, and
this is the common way of using one. It can, however, be used for
“writing in” the successive units, placing the first letter of a
given unit beneath number 1, the second letter beneath number 2,
and so on until the seventh letter has been written below number 7,
afterward beginning with the first letter of another unit below
number 1 again. Under this plan the first unit of our figure,
_L E T U S H E_, would have been _written in_ in the order
_U L H S T E E_. Since all units would follow exactly the same
pattern, the resulting _columns_ would be identical with those of
the present block; the only essential difference would be that the
new columns are already transposed, and can be taken off in straight
order. The two resulting cryptograms, however, would not be the same.
The unit which was _written in_ in the order _U L H S T E E_, would
have been in the order _E H S L U T E_ had the method been that of
_taking out_ (or “off”).

The Nihilist transposition is ordinarily accomplished by “writing in,”
and its numerical key is applied to _both columns and rows_. Thus its
major unit is a square, and the seven-letter keyword HALIFAX, applied
to both dimensions of a rectangle, demands a unit of 49 letters,
while the shorter word SCOTIA, key-length 6, requires a unit of 36
letters.

Theoretically, this cipher is a _double transposition_, requiring two
successive operations as shown in Fig. 12. But in practice, these two
transpositions can take place simultaneously as pointed out in Fig.
13. The operator, having laid out his key-numbers at top and side of
his square, begins his writing in the cell at which the column headed
by number 1 crosses the row headed by number 1. He _writes in_ his
first unit, proceeds to the row numbered 2 for the writing in of his
second unit, then to the row numbered 3, and so on, taking rows in
the order shown by the numbers at the left, and placing the letters
of his unit by following the numbers across the top. Thus, with only
a little concentration, he has the entire major unit at one
continuous writing. The decipherer, too, having restored his
cryptogram unit to its block and written his two series of numbers,
may read, or copy, continuously. The decipherer, in fact, uses the
exact method which would produce a Nihilist cryptogram if a key were
used in the “taking out” manner. What we have described is the
encipherment of a single major unit; and all cryptograms must
contain an exact number of these major units.


                                   Figure 12

                                 Nihilist Plan

  (a)  Transposal of Columns            (b)  Transposal of Rows

     S  C  O  T  I  A                      S-5    E  U  J  W  T  O
     5  2  4  6  3  1                      C-2    R  A  F  O  R  E
                                           O-4    A  N  E  B  C  O
     S  E  U  H  T  L  (Let us h)          T-6    X  L  X  X  S  E
     R  A  F  O  R  E                      I-3    A  Y  U  T  O  M
     A  Y  U  T  O  M                      A-1    S  E  U  H  T  L (Let us h)
     A  N  E  B  C  O                                                          
     E  U  J  W  T  O       (c)  Cryptogram:  E U J W T   O R A F O   R E A N E
     X  L  X  X  S  E                                                          
                            B C O X L   X X S E A   Y U T O M   S E U H T   L.


The second operation, that of taking off the cryptogram, is not
always done by straight horizontals as we have shown this under
(c) of Fig. 12. This, of course, is the expected way; but the
Nihilist square is quite frequently taken off by some other one of
the forty-odd routes possible to rectangular transpositions. The
decipherer, knowing this route, merely writes his units back into
their blocks; but the decryptor is often faced with a preliminary
problem of discovering how they were taken off. Sometimes he must
also discover how many units a cryptogram contains.

To understand how such problems are solved, it is necessary to pause
and consider the make-up of ordinary written plaintext. English
vowel-percentage, as mentioned, is about 40%, and practically never
varies out of its limits 35%-45%. Each 40 vowels are fairly _evenly_
distributed throughout their 100 letters. Take any English text
whatever, not composed of initials or otherwise distorted, and,
beginning where you please, mark it off into ten-letter segments
and count the vowels in each of the segments. You will find that
the majority of these have exactly the normal number of vowels,
which is 4. Others will have 3 or 5, which, though outside of the
limits 35%-45%, are the closest variations possible. It will be a
rare segment indeed which contains fewer than 3 vowels or a greater
number than 5.

But suppose, having marked off such a text into ten-letter units,
or segments, we take each of these segments individually and mix
up the order of its letters, though still allowing it to stand
where it is. And suppose, having done this, we erase the original
division-marks and, beginning at some point in the midst of a former
segment, we again mark off a series of ten-letter units, and count
the vowels of these new segments. This time, we are just as likely
as not to find seven or eight vowels in one segment and none at all
in the next, depending on just what we did to the old units, and
still we have not actually mixed the units; we simply have our
division marks in the wrong places. Imagine, then, how the vowel
distribution can vary when a transposition is one so planned as to
break up units and scramble their letters.

This fact of uniformity in vowel distribution is of enormous
assistance in dealing with the simpler transpositions. For
instance, it may be that what we want to know is the length of
the units, and that what we have is a cryptogram of 144 letters,
which could be a single square, or a series of 36-letter squares,
or even a series of 16-letter or 9-letter squares. We may start
at the beginning of this cryptogram and mark it off into equal
segments of any length we like, afterward counting the vowels per
segment. If every segment shows approximately a 40% vowel count,
the chances are that we have a series of intact units, each one
merely transposed within itself; but if one segment shows 50%,
another 30%, another 28%, and so on, we may be quite sure that our
division marks are in the wrong places.


                      Figure 13


    5 2 4 6 3 1       5 2 4 6 3 1       5 2 4 6 3 1

  5                 5                 5
  2                 2 . A . . . E     2 R A F O R E
  4                 4                 4
  6                 6                 6
  3                 3                 3 . Y . . . M
  1 . E . . . L     1 S E U H T L     1 S E U H T L


Returning, now, to the Nihilist cipher, suppose we consider the
make-up of its major unit, that is, of any one block. This major
unit is a series of minor units, and each of these minor units, at
the time of encipherment, was written by itself on its own line. In
the beginning, it was a small fragment of plaintext, presumably
conforming closely to a 40% vowel count. It is true that we placed
it on the line in transposed order, but we did not remove any of
its letters or add any new letters. Even in the transposal of the
lines themselves, we merely removed a number of intact units from
one place to another. There has never been a time, throughout the
entire encipherment, when we took any letter out of its original
minor unit and put it with some other unit. Thus, as we first see
our completed Nihilist square, we still have, on each horizontal
line, a small fragment of an English sentence in which all of the
original vowels are still present. If such a block is now taken
off by straight horizontals, it is no more than a series of intact
units. To break up these units, we must at least take it out by
verticals; and they will, of course, be much more thoroughly mixed
when taken out by diagonals or spirals.

The decryptor, hoping for the best, writes his cryptogram into a
square (or series of squares) by straight horizontals and counts the
vowels per horizontal line. If his block is wide, he may estimate
the actual number of vowels represented by 40%; if it is narrow,
he may only roughly approximate the number; but in either case what
he hopes to see is _evenness of distribution_. More than half of
his units must be exactly normal, and any which are not exactly
normal must show the smallest variation possible. If he finds that
this is the case, he assumes that his block arrangement is the
encipherer’s original square, with only the minor possibility that
half of his lines may be written in the wrong direction. If his
distribution is not uniform, he counts the vowels per _column_ so
as to find out what kind of distribution he would get from a
vertical arrangement (ascending or descending). If this, too, fails
to show him a uniform vowel distribution, he writes out a new block
by the route of alternating verticals (or gets this count from his
first block; this is possible, though a little confusing). Afterward,
he may go on to the diagonals and spirals until finally he reaches
the arrangement in which more than half of his horizontal lines show
a 40% vowel count, and the rest a minimum variation.

Now let us consider a concrete example of decryptment. The (purely
imaginary) history of the cryptogram shown as Fig. 14 is meager. It
was taken from the body of an unnamed man, killed in attempting to
dynamite a bridge in an American town called Baysport.


                                    Figure 14

  I Y W B B  O R T A F  T I X D G  S S E G H  N A T O O  I T O X T  L U T R E

  L X F A Y  S D R C H  T O M E D  E I O V I  K F T V T  L A E U.


To begin with, the cipher appears to be transposition. Its cryptogram
shows 37½% of vowels, very close to the number expected of English
or German. It is too short to provide any reliable distinction
between these two languages, but the source of the cryptogram points
to English. Again, the encipherer, although he has grouped his
message in the usual fives, has neglected to complete his final
group with a null, and from this we judge that 64 letters is the
actual length of the message. The fact that 64 is a _square_ is
promptly noticed. But it is also the sum of several smaller squares,
and the unit might be 16. To investigate this possibility, we may
mark the cryptogram off into four equal segments of 16 letters each,
and count the vowels per segment. The normal number of vowels in a
16-letter segment should be about 6, and segments of this length
are long enough to afford reliable information, so that we may
promptly discard the possible unit 16 when we find that the first
segment shows 5 vowels (31%), the second, 7 vowels (44%), and the
remaining two, respectively, 4 and 8. Such a distribution does not
prove that the unit 16 is a total impossibility, because many things
are not average in single examples, but it is an extremely bad one
and would never be accepted. On the other hand, a satisfactory
distribution does not prove absolutely that a given unit-length,
or block arrangement, is correct. Here, had there been no question
of the ever-present _square_, we might have been led astray by the
unit 32, which divides the vowels of the present cryptogram into
two equal halves. In this connection, we can only say that the
decryptment of any cipher, even the simplest, will at times include
a number of wanderings which we shall have to overlook in
demonstrating principles.

Assuming, then, that the large unit, 64, is correct, we must get it
back into its block — presumably square — in the encipherer’s
original arrangement. Fig. 15 shows the same cryptogram written
into two different blocks. For an 8-letter unit, the normal number
of vowels is about 3 (actually 3.2). In block (a), a count taken on
the horizontal lines shows half of the units normal, two of the
others with the smallest possible variation, and two greatly outside
the 35%-45% limits. When the unit is so short, and when the line
containing only one vowel may be the one which was completed with
nulls, and most particularly when we have no other units to act as
a check, we cannot confidently discard a block of this kind. In
practice, we might waste some time giving it a trial, or we might
look for something better. Notice that its distribution is “ragged.”
We expected to find _even_ distribution, with _more_ than half of
the units exactly normal. This block (a) is the simple horizontal
arrangement. To find out what the simple vertical arrangement would
give us, we have only to examine the columns of this. Here the count
is obviously bad.

In block (b), we have one of the diagonal rearrangements from which
two sets of vowel counts can also be taken. Here, the horizontal
lines have given us exactly what we hoped for: Evenness of
distribution, more than half of the units normal, and only one unit
outside of limits. This, almost surely, is the encipherer’s original
block, in which every line contains one intact unit.

From our meager history of the case, we do not, of course, know that
this is specifically the Nihilist cipher. It becomes a case of
considering the various ciphers with which we happen to be
acquainted, and a _columnar_ transposition of the general kind shown
in Fig. 11 is an exceedingly common case. Moreover, a series of
juggled columns is suggested here in the fact that intact units are
standing on their own lines and still have not resulted in plaintext.


                             Figure 15

  (a)  Horizontal Rearrangement,    (b)  Diagonal Rearrangement,
         With TWO Vowel-Counts            With TWO Vowel-Counts

        I Y W B B O R T    3             I W O F G N O L    3
        A F T I X D G S    2             Y B A D H T E R    3
        S E G H N A T O    3             B T X G I R D E    2
        O I T O X T L U    4             R I E O T S M V    3
        T R E L X F A Y    3             T S O U Y O O T    5
        S D R C H T O M    1             S T L A T I F L    2
        E D E I O V I K    5             A T F H E K T E    3
        F T V T L A E U    3             X X C D I V A U    3

        4 3 2 3 1 3 4 4                  3 1 4 3 4 2 4 3


In Fig. 16, we have the successive steps which would be taken in
order to investigate this probability. At (a), the diagonal
rearrangement of our cryptogram, selected as the most likely of
those which were examined, has been repeated with its eight columns
set wide apart, and consecutively numbered for identification. These
presumed columns are now cut apart, and thus we have eight paper
strips which can be moved about and rearranged in various manners
in the hope of causing words to form on some of the lines.

Since we lack that most powerful of decrypting tools, a _probable
word_, we are forced to begin with probable letter-sequence. If the
magic letter _Q_ were present, we should look for a companion _U_,
and after that for a vowel to follow _QU_. But this, too, is lacking.

Familiarity with English digrams (or, in the case of the beginner,
an inspection of the digram chart or the list of digrams) shows that
_TH_ is by far the most frequent combination used in the language,
and that _HE_ and _HA_, also including an _H_, are very prominent
among the leaders. Further than this, the list of trigrams informs
us that both _THE_ and _THA_ are of outstanding frequency. Of the
four letters included, three are so frequent, and appear in so many
different combinations, as to be confusing; but _H_, though belonging
to the high-frequency group, does not appear in many _different_
combinations, and is less frequent than the other three.

Looking, then, for _H_, we find it twice in our present cryptogram,
once on the second row and once on the seventh; and, since the
seventh row shows two _T_’s and the second only one _T_, suppose we
try the second row, placing together the two columns (strips) which
are headed by the numbers 6-5 in order to set up a digram _TH_ on
the second row, as shown at (b).


                             Figure 16

  (a)                                         (b)
     1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8               6   5

     I   W   O   F   G   N   O   L               N   G
     Y   B   A   D   H   T   E   R               T   H
     B   T   X   G   I   R   D   E               R   I
     R   I   E   O   T   S   M   V               S   T
     T   S   O   U   Y   O   O   T               O   Y
     S   T   L   A   T   I   F   L               I   T
     A   T   F   H   E   K   T   E               K   E
     X   X   C   D   I   V   A   U               V   I

  (c)
     6   5   7  ........   6   5   7   4 ...  1   6   5   7   4

     N   G   O             N   G   O   F      I   N   G   O   F
     T   H   E             T   H   E   D      Y   T   H   E   D
     R   I   D             R   I   D   G      B   R   I   D   G
     S   T   M             S   T   M   O      R   S   T   M   O
     O   Y   O             O   Y   O   U      T   O   Y   O   U
     I   T   F             I   T   F   A      S   I   T   F   A
     K   E   T             K   E   T   H      A   K   E   T   H
     V   I   A             V   I   A   D      X   V   I   A   D

  (d)
     6   5   3  ........   6   5   3   4 ...

     N   G   O             N   G   O   F     (Abandoned in
     T   H   A             T   H   A   D
     R   I   X             R   I   X   G         favor of c.)
     S   T   E             S   T   E   O
     O   Y   O             O   Y   O   U
     I   T   L             I   T   L   A
     K   E   F             K   E   F   H
     V   I   C             V   I   C   D


The formation of this digram _TH_ on the second row has automatically
set up a digram _NG_ on the top row, a digram _RI_ on the third row,
and so on; and we find, upon examining these newly-formed digrams,
that the whole series is made up of good English combinations. Thus,
it looks as if our combination 6-5 is correct, and we will proceed
with a possible _HE_ or _HA_, attempting to complete a trigram _THE_
or _THA_ on the second row.

Both _E_ and _A_ are present on the second row, and we may observe
at the steps marked (c) and (d) in the figure just what would be the
result of adding strip 7 or strip 3. At first glance, it appears that
combinations 6-5-7 and 6-5-3 are about equally probable. But it so
happens that both set-ups have formed a sequence _YO_ on the fifth
line, suggesting _YOU_; and when the only _U_ on that line is tried
in both places, it becomes evident that combination 6-5-7-4 is going
to give better results than combination 6-5-3-4, where we find poor
sequences like _KEFH_. At this point, or earlier, a decryptor will
probably proceed on the left side of his set-up, completing the
syllable _ING_ and the series of column-numbers 1-6-5-7-4, as shown.
When this setting together of columns automatically brings out on
the third row a sequence _BRIDG_, we have our first suggestion of
a _probable word_, since the man who had this cryptogram on his
person had just attempted to blow up a _BRIDGE_. After this, all is
plain sailing; the necessary _E_ happens to be on the same line, and
even if it were not, we have only three strips left, and these may
be placed by trial. Thus our eight paper strips arrive at the stage
indicated on the left-hand side of Fig. 17.


                                  Figure 17

            Strips in order                   Adjustment of rows

       2   1   6   5   7   4   8   3

  1    W   I   N   G   O   F   L   O          2....   B Y T H E D R A
  2    B   Y   T   H   E   D   R   A          1....   W I N G O F L O
  3    T   B   R   I   D   G   E   X          6....   T S I T F A L L
  4    I   R   S   T   M   O   V   E          5....   S T O Y O U T O
  5    S   T   O   Y   O   U   T   O          7....   T A K E T H E F
  6    T   S   I   T   F   A   L   L          4....   I R S T M O V E
  7    T   A   K   E   T   H   E   F          8....   X X V I A D U C
  8    X   X   V   I   A   D   U   C          3....   T B R I D G E X

  "Taking-out" Key:  2 1 6 5 7 4 8 3                       1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
                     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8    "Writing-in" Key:  2 1 8 6 4 3 5 7


If we have previously met the Nihilist transposition, we can see now
what the cipher is, and, if it is a true Nihilist, we can finish the
reconstruction _by decipherment with the key_. To do this, we simply
number the rows from 1 to 8 and then disarrange these rows so that
their numbers will reproduce the series of column numbers. This is
shown on the right-hand side of Fig. 17, where the plaintext is
easily read: “By the drawing of lots, it falls to you to take the
first move. Viaduct bridge.” The gentleman required three nulls, and
thriftily made use of them as punctuation. If we have not previously
met the Nihilist encipherment, or if this cryptogram is of a kindred
type but governed by two separate keys, one for columns and another
for rows, the only difference is that we may have to experiment a
little with rows before finding their correct order.

In completing our solution, we have obtained a key, 2 1 6 5 7 4 8 3,
shown in the series of column-numbers, and should other cryptograms
be intercepted having the same key as the first, we need merely
decipher them with our key. It is, however, a “taking out” key, while
the Nihilist, as we have seen, is ordinarily _written in_. Having
either of the keys, we may find the other easily enough as suggested
in the figure. Simply “number the numbers” and put them back in
serial order. The new set of numbers, now disarranged, will show you
the other key. It would not be impossible for the student who is a
good guesser to find the keyword on which our present writing-in key
was based. This kind of work, with paper strips, is much more rapid
than it probably seems, and is often done at random. The keen eye
needs no digram list for the spotting of _HT_, merely reversed, with
_GN_ above it.

Speaking now of the ordinary columnars (Fig. 11), one minor point
should perhaps be brought to the attention of the very new student.
Quite often, a digram, such as the _QU_ of Fig. 18, is not written
on a single line, and it may be necessary to match this valuable
digram in the manner shown at (b) of that figure, coming out in the
end as at (c). In such event, we can later on transfer columns 5-6-7
to the other side of the block, raising them all by one position.
(Column numbers, in this case, are for reference only.) The same
would not apply to a Nihilist block in which the whereabouts of the
“next” row is unknown; the digram_ QU_ would have to be abandoned in
favor of something else.


                      Figure 18

       (a)               (b)                (c)

  1 2 3 4 5 6 7             1                1 2 3 4
                         7             5 6 7        
  T H I S I S Q             T                T H I S
  U I T E T R U          Q  U          I S Q U I T E
  E B U T W E D          U  E          T R U E B U T
                         D             W E D        


We mentioned briefly, too, the possibility of finding alternating
horizontals, so that only half of the rows can be “anagrammed”
together. Such minor problems, and they are numerous, can all be
ironed out easily enough once the student is familiar with his type,
and columnar transposition, encountered frequently and in all sorts
of disguises, is surely the most fascinating of all types. In
Chapter VI we are to meet it again, this time with an incomplete
rectangle.


16.  By PICCOLA.  (Ordinary columnar).

O E E H E   A T F L S   V A S Y C   I O A E D   Q O H D F   M C M T C   P O G E O 
R E U G M   I E F U O   G C Y W G   D Q U U I   A L S I E   R N O R N   R R A T O   A Q.

17.  By KRIS KROST.  (Nihilist).

T C I G R   H N L A G   T L I S A   A O M O R   N R I M N   N E T R N   K S A O E 
I S D L E   I K H H H   E R D F T   A S O I E   T I H N E   B T K E.

18.  By MERLIN.  (Nihilist.  Its keyword has been used as a word-spacer).

T O L F P   T E E R B   I V O P S   N R E W O   R L I T T   E S E N E   T O O H O 
F H H E H   N Y H I O   P F O S T   G I P H E   I E E T K   I N U I B   N R A A Y 
R R E E W   L S T H T   E E R D T   S E A I R   S R E A E   R R E P E   U E U R S 
S U I R R   O F E S T   R P O P A   O R R B E   E O N T T   E E R T A   H E R A R 
L A D I O   E E Z E L   Y A O A Y   M S L U L   W I Y N N   O O S S T   G T S H L 
W E Y M D   M E A R E   E U R I Y   T P P R N   Y N T Y O.

19.  By SLEEPY.  (Nihilist "route-cipher").

Wants  Little  Wish  Should  Long  Muster  But  The  Man  And  Gold  Wants  If  Me 
Many  Below  Mint  For  Not  A  So  And  Nor  Of  More  With  Score  In  Song  Wants 
Were  I  That  Told  Exactly  Are  Here  A  Long  'Tis  Many  'Tis  My  But  Each 
Still  Little  Would  So!

20.  By TITOGI.  (Ordinary columnar).

T W E I S   I A H O D   S P O D E   R I T O N   J E U T A   I A S Y S   H N T S T 
K D N R S   W U.

21.  By PICCOLA.  (Ordinary columnar).

T E E P H   B M E F E   B N T U X   A V E H A   R D W X I   E L N C V   E V R O I 
T A F U L   B O R O N   T H M T M   U E F S H   O E T T L   E D A K E   E G D N L 
E E N N I   O O E B E   E E R S T   N R Y D C   N X O N O   E N E X.

(And now try this.  Probable word:  EXAMPLE).

H E L K L   T I P N W   H S E S I   A X S R R   E E A C M   C P L T L   T E O S D 
R A O E E   X T I H Y   E U H N G   E M Y T A   S L M A A   D S C.




CHAPTER V
Geometrical Types — The Turning Grille

The well-known _turning grille_, also known as the _rotating_, or
_revolving_ grille, is said to have been originated by an Italian,
Girolamo Cardano (or Cardan). Such grilles can be prepared from any
substantial material capable of being made into sheets and marked
into cells, and may take the form of any geometrical figure which
happens to be equilateral. The number of cells to be clipped out,
so as to form apertures for the writing of letters, is based on the
shape of the grille, as: one-third of the total number for a
triangle, one-fourth for a square, and so on; and the writing of the
letters is done on a section of paper of the same size and shape as
the grille, and preferably ruled off into cells which correspond to
those of the grille. After such a grille has been placed on its
corresponding section of paper, and a letter has been written through
each aperture, the grille is _turned_ a certain number of degrees to
a new position on the same section of paper, so as to cover from
sight the letters already written, and expose another series of blank
cells for the writing of new letters; and this continues until the
grille has taken its full number of positions and every cell has been
accounted for on the section of paper beneath it. The preferred
grille is a square, based on square cells, and takes four positions.
Usually it is based on an _even number_ of these cells; otherwise,
the full number of cells is not evenly divisible into quarters,
leaving an extra central cell which has to be omitted or specially
dealt with.

The grille called “Fleissner,” after an Austrian cryptologist,
Eduard Fleissner von Wostrowitz, is the perfected Cardan grille as
described by Jules Verne in his story, “Mathias Sandorf.” Colonel
Fleissner’s grille is a square, taking four positions, and is always
based on an even number of cells. In preparing this grille, it is
easy enough to select apertures at random in such a way that each one
governs its own four cells on the paper beneath, causing each of
these to be uncovered exactly once. But concerning the preparation
of the grille, there is a phase which affects the value of the cipher
itself: unless the grille can be constructed at will, in accordance
with a key which is “easily changed, communicated, and remembered,”
it requires the keeping on hand of a material apparatus which can be
stolen or copied, or which cannot be destroyed in case of emergency.

There are, of course, many ways in which a key could be applied. The
method used here is one published several years ago by Ohaver, and
can be studied in Fig. 19. First, as shown at (a), we have a quick
mechanical method for selecting apertures that cannot conflict. The
square is divided into four quarters, and each quarter, treated as
if it were the one occupying the upper left-hand corner, receives
its consecutive cell numbers, 1 to 9 (or 1 to 4, 1 to 16, 1 to 25,
1 to 36, etc.). If the route of writing-in is made exactly the same
for all four of the quarters, it becomes possible to clip _one each_
of the numerals 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 . . . . . . . etc., taken absolutely at
pleasure, and each resulting aperture will expose only its particular
four cells. This can be seen at (b).

The grille shown at (b), however, was based on the key-phrase
FRIENDLY GROUPS, and the method can be studied at (c), following
Ohaver’s plan, even to its minute details. The fact that the square
is based on 6 is told in the initial letter of the key-word, _F_,
6th letter of the alphabet. This key-word must yield nine letters,
one for each proposed aperture in the grille. A short word, such as
FRIEND, can be lengthened by a partial repetition, as FRIENDFRI,
while a longer word is cut off after its ninth letter, as it was in
Fig. 19. This literal key is next converted to a numerical key, as
explained in the preceding chapter, and the nine resulting numbers
are divided as evenly as possible into four sections. Finally,
considering the four quarters of the grille in some definitely agreed
rotation, each section of key-numbers will show what numerals are to
be clipped from a given quarter. In the figure, the numerals 3 and 8
were clipped from the first quarter, numerals 5 and 2 from the second
— proceeding in a clockwise direction, — numerals 7 and 1 from the
third quarter, and numerals 6, 9, and 4 from the remaining quarter.


               Figure 19 - Preparation of a Grille

                   (a)               (b)

            Top
             1  2  3  7  4  1      _  _  3  _  _  _
             4  5  6  8  5  2      _  _  _  _  5  2
             7  8  9  9  6  3      _  8  _  _  _  _
             3  6  9  9  8  7      _  6  9  _  _  7
             2  5  8  6  5  4      _  _  _  _  _  _
             1  4  7  3  2  1      _  4  _  _  _  1


                                  (c)

  F R I E N D L Y G
  3 8.5 2.7 1.6 9 4   1st Q:  3,8;  2d: 5,2;  3d: 7,1;  4th: 6,9,4


Another method for selecting cells, proposed by Edward Nickerson,
dispenses with numerals, using in their places the letters of a
key-word which must be without repetitions, as FRIENDLY G happens to
be. If these nine letters, all different, be written into the nine
cells of each quarter, following exactly the same route in each case,
it becomes possible to clip one each of the letters _F_, _R_, _I_,
_E_, _N_, _D_, _L_, _Y_, _G_, taken wherever desired. The choice can
be made as follows: Taking the four quarters of the grille in the
agreed rotation, follow the normal alphabet, clipping _A_, (when
present,) from the first quarter, _B_, (when present,) from the
second quarter, _C_, (when present,) from the third quarter, and so
on. Or, to insure a more even distribution, rearrange the nine
letters in alphabetical sequence: _D E_, _F G_, _I L_, _N R Y_, and
divide as in the former plan, clipping _D_ and _E_ from the first
quarter, _F_ and _G_ from the second, and so on. While it is possible
to provide key-phrases of sixteen letters, without repeating, it is
probably more convenient to take whatever number of letters is needed
from a key-mixed alphabet of the following type:
F R I E N D L Y G O U P S A B C . . . . . . W X Z _f r i e_ . . . . . .

In Fig. 20, at (a), (b), (c), (d), we have a detailed picture of the
operation of this grille on the 36-letter plaintext unit: MISFIRE ON
VIADUCT JOB X RUSH INSTRUCTIONS. One definite edge of the grille must
be designated as the top, and there is a right and a wrong side.
Taking precautions in these respects, we place the grille over a
sheet of paper and mark its outline with a pencil (or otherwise make
sure of maintaining this one location). We write the first nine
letters as at (a), and give the grille a quarter-turn to the right.
We add the second nine letters as at (b) — where the newly-written
letters are the capitals; the others, in lower case, are presumed to
be hidden from sight by the solid portion of the grille. Another
quarter-turn makes ready for the next nine letters (c), and a
remaining quarter-turn completes the revolution (d). The writing-in,
at all times, is _straight ahead_: cells taken from left to right,
and lines taken from top to bottom.


          Figure 20 - Four Stages of Encipherment

          (a)                                 (b)

   _  _  M  _  _  _                    _  _  m  _  _  _
   _  _  _  _  I  S                    V  _  I  A  i  s
   _  F  _  _  _  _                    _  f  D  _  _  U
   _  I  R  _  _  E                    _  i  r  _  _  e
   _  _  _  _  _  _                    _  _  _  _  C  _
   _  O  _  _  _  N                    T  o  J  _  O  n

          (c)                                 (d)

   B  _  m  _  X  _                    b  T  m  R  x  U
   v  _  i  a  i  s                    v  C  i  a  i  s
   R  f  d  U  S  u                    r  f  d  u  s  u
   _  i  r  _  H  e                    T  i  r  I  h  e
   I  N  _  _  c  _                    i  n  O  N  c  S
   t  o  j  S  o  n                    t  o  j  s  o  n


In the Jules Verne story, the three units of his cryptogram were left
standing in their blocks. Verne’s heroes were clever enough to
unearth a ready-made grille, and, by laying this, in its four
successive positions, above each of the three blocks, were able to
read the message through the apertures. Today, such blocks would be
taken off in five-letter groups, and possibly by a devious route. A
little concealment can be afforded, too, by completing the last
five-letter group with nulls, or, better, by adding these nulls at
the beginning of the cryptogram. It is also possible to make the
final 36-letter unit _incomplete_ by blanking out its bottom cells
before putting in the letters.

A grille can be used in other ways. Negligible changes can be
produced in its cryptograms by altering the customary order of its
four positions. A more substantial change is introduced by departures
from the straight horizontal direction of the writing-in. It is
possible to revolve the paper instead of the grille, setting the
letters right-side-up at the time of their taking off. And in all
of these cases, the grille is still serving as an instrument for
_writing-in_; there would be corresponding cases in which it is used
as an instrument for _taking out_ the letters of a prepared block.
Each variation, perhaps, would require its own separate analysis
before its individual inherent weaknesses could be spotted and used
as the basis for a special method. If the student, after observing
some special methods applied to ordinary grille encipherment, cares
to try his hand at analyzing some one of its variations, we suggest
that he take a series of numbers, 1 to 36, 1 to 64, etc., and carry
these through a complete encipherment to see what becomes of each
one.

  * * *

Grille transposition, like the Nihilist, involves a major unit
composed of minor units. But here, the four minor units are never
left intact, and if the type of encipherment is not known in advance,
the decryptment of a single block will give somewhat more trouble
than the decryptment of a single Nihilist block, for the reason that
the decryptor usually exhausts the simpler possibilities before
trying the complex. With grille encipherment known, or suspected, we
have a cipher bristling with points of attack.

The strictly horizontal writing-in of each minor unit has had to be
done within a fairly short compass, and no two consecutive letters of
this unit can have been placed very far apart without causing other
letters to draw closer together. Their average distance apart is four
cells. For the decryptor, this actual distance apart of letters is
made shorter by his knowledge that for each letter considered, there
are three others which cannot have been written into the same unit
with it, _and that he knows definitely what these three letters are_.

Particularly interesting is the assistance he receives from the
symmetrical pattern into which the letters of his four units are
written; position 3 is position 1 reversed, and position 4 is
position 2 reversed. Thus, having tentatively selected the letters
of a probable word, or fairly long sequence, he can check the
correctness of his observations by examining another sequence which
would automatically build up, traveling in the opposite direction,
in the reverse position of the grille.

For a clear understanding of these matters, suppose we consider the
decryptment of the block just enciphered, on the assumption that we
suspect the presence there of the word VIADUCT. Fig. 21 shows a 6 x 6
block carrying consecutive cell-numbers, which are also the serial
numbers of the cryptogram letters, as these appear in a separate
block beside the first. It is understood that our first move would be
that of ascertaining whether or not the seven letters of this word
are all present. It must be remembered, too, that a long word is not
necessarily altogether in one unit; the grille might have been turned
before the word was completed.

In the present case, however, our first letter, _V_, is found near
the top of the square, and only once, so that if the word VIADUCT is
present, a substantial portion of it must have been written before
the grille was turned. We expect to find letters _I_, _A_, _D_, _U_,
and so on, following the letter _V_ in just that order, and without
any very great distance between any two of them; and if, approaching
the bottom of the square, we find it necessary to proceed backward
for _U_, _C_, or _T_, then the grille was surely turned before that
_U_, _C_, or _T_, was written.

Now, considering together the two blocks of Fig. 21, we find that our
first letter, _V_, occupies cell No. 7. In imagination, we revolve a
grille in which the only aperture has been cut in cell 7, and find
that this aperture exposes the cells numbered 5, 30, and 32. These
three cells, then, were surely covered from sight when the letter
_V_ was written into cell 7, and regardless of what the letters are
that occupy these three cells, it is definitely impossible that any
one of the three could have been used in the same minor unit with the
_V_ of cell 7.

Looking for a letter _I_, we find several within a very short range.
But the block contains only one _A_, and since we cannot proceed
backward after selecting the _I_, the position of _A_ (cell 10) tells
us that only the _I_ of cell 9 is possible. We accept, then, the _I_
of cell 9, and, again revolving an imaginary grille with its only
aperture cut in cell 9, we eliminate the letters found in cells 17,
28, and 20. Similarly, accepting _A_ of cell 10, we eliminate
whatever letters are occupying cells 23, 27, and 14. So far, none of
the letters eliminated have been wanted for the development of the
word VIADUCT; but notice that the fourth letter, _D_, found only
once in the block, occupies cell 15, thus eliminating the letters of
cells 16, 22, and 21, one of which is _U_, the next letter
needed. Thus, we are not forced to make a decision as between the _U_
of cell 16 and the _U_ of cell 18.


                       Figure 21

   1   2   3   4   5   6        B   T   M   R   X5  U  

   7   8   9  10  11  12        V7  C   I9  A10 I   S

  13  14  15  16  17  18        R   F   D15 U   S   U18

  19  20  21  22  23  24        T19 I   R   I22 H   E

  25  26  27  28  29  30        I   N   O27 N28 C   S30

  31  32  33  34  35  36        T   O32 J   S   O   N


We have put together, then, the letters _V I A D U_ in the only
manner which is possible at all, and their cell-numbers, taken in
order, are 7-9-10-15-18. If the grille is reversed, these same
openings, named in the same order, will uncover cells 30-28-27-22-19;
these new cells, however, will not be seen in reverse order; they
will be in straight order like their letters. If, then, our sequence
_V I A D U_ is correct, the five letters found in cells
19-22-27-28-30, taken in normal order, should form an acceptable
English combination. A glance at the right-hand block of Fig. 21
will show that this check-sequence is _T I O N S_.

When we selected _V_, we automatically selected _S_ of cell 30 as
its check-letter. When we added _I_ on the right-hand side of _V_,
we obtained with it the _N_ of cell 28 on the _left_ side of _S_,
giving the check-digram as _NS_, entirely acceptable. With _A_, we
added the _O_ of cell 27, giving the check-trigram as _ONS_,
still acceptable; and so on to _IONS_, _TIONS_. Our complete word
VIADUCT produces the check-sequence _UCTIONS_. It must not be
objected that the fact of having only one each of letters _V_,
_A_, _D_, has too greatly facilitated the search. This is
an entirely legitimate expectation in a case where we deal with one
unit, and the decryptor, when possible, chooses his probable word
with this in mind. In the absence of a probable word, we are never
without probable sequences: the list of frequent trigrams, and the
various common affIxes, such as _-TION_, _-MENT_, _-ENCE_, _-ABLE_,
_CON-_, _PRE-_, etc. For the first three or four letters, where
decisions are sometimes uncertain, it is more satisfactory to work
directly on the square (prepared in ink), so that impossible cells
may be canceled in pencil, and the pencil marks erased when wrong;
but once well started, a paper or celluloid grille can be prepared
to fit the block, and the chosen cells actually cut out as they are
selected. Having found seven out of nine apertures, we may, if we
like, turn the paper grille and experiment with its other two
positions. The letters, in this case, will show gaps in sequence,
and may indicate by these gaps just where the new openings ought to
be cut. With one full unit determined, we have the grille for reading
the others. The only remaining problem would be that of deciding the
exact sequence of these four units, with their context as a guide.

For the case in which it is necessary to begin with letter-sequences,
particularly if driven back to the digram list, the device shown in
Fig. 22 may prove of considerable assistance: The cryptogram is
written in both directions, and thus pairs every letter with its
check-letter, so that check-sequences here would be written backward.
This idea is adapted from General Givierge’s _Cours de cryptographie_.


                                  Figure 22

   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18
   B   T   M   R   X   U   V   C   I   A   I   S   R   F   D   U   S   U
   N   O   S   J   O   T   S   C   N   O   N   I   E   H   I   R   I   T
  36  35  34  33  32  31  30  29  28  27  26  25  24  23  22  21  20  19

    19  20  21  22  23  24  25  26  27  28  29  30  31  32  33  34  35  36
     T   I   R   I   H   E   I   N   O   N   C   S   T   O   J   S   O   N
     U   S   U   D   F   R   S   I   A   I   C   V   U   X   R   M   T   B
    18  17  16  15  14  13  12  11  10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1


Working with digrams is tedious, but will, in the end, give results.
Considering, for instance, Fig. 22, its first letter is _B_. Of
letters standing immediately to the right of _B_, the first one which
would form a good digram with it is the _R_ of cell 4. But
consideration of a possible digram _BR_, cells 1-4, shows the
check-digram as _JN_, cells 33-36, and this latter digram is so rare
in the language that Meaker did not find it even once in his
10,000-letter text. The next letter known to have an affnity for _B_
is the _U_ of cell 6, but a possible digram _BU_, cells 1-6, cannot
be considered, for the reason that cells 1 and 6 are uncovered by the
same opening in the grille. The distance away of the next letters to
which _B_ is partial proves frightening, and _B_ is abandoned (it is
actually followed by the _X_ of cell 5).


                  Figure 23

  R R T H A O    U E E O S B    A G D E A E
  A V E B K U    N E S F D I    A N K S S S
  T A D P E B    R A N S U K    O D X F D N
  C R E A R R    N J A T I Y    G O A O A R
  A O I L I D    X T U S O B    R A A N L E
  T S G T E P    L M A O T V    H R A X E X


Beginning over, with _T_ of cell 2: The first frequent digram noticed
is _TR_, cells 2-4, and shows the check-digram as _JO_, cells 33-35.
We accept this at once, because the letter _J_ must presumably be
followed by a vowel, and the only vowel immediately available is
this particular _O_. To extend the accepted _TR_, we require a vowel.
The first one is U, cell 6, and extends the check-digram to _TJO_,
cells 31-33-35, acceptable if _T_ is the final letter of a word. To
extend the supposed trigram _TRU_, we experiment with _C_ of cell 8
and obtain a check-sequence _CTJO_, cells 29-31-33-35, which is still
encouraging. We must know, of course, that no two of the chosen cells
are in conflict with each other. The unit we have partially
reconstructed is the second one of Fig. 20, and the check-sequence
is the fourth unit.

A method somewhat resembling the foregoing consists in writing
another block beside the first, in which the letters of the
cryptogram are strictly in reversed order. The pattern of the
check-sequence will then follow exactly that of the sequence under
examination, merely with its letters in reverse order. Still a
further suggestion was made by Herbert Raines: In the preparation of
the two blocks, one in straight order and the other in reverse order,
the writing should be done vertically, with all columns containing
four letters. The symmetry can still be found, and any two
consecutive plaintext letters are more nearly at their original
distance apart — the average 4.

So far, we have been dealing with an isolated unit. In Fig. 23 we
have a longer cryptogram, suspected of being a reply to the first.
We have set it up in its three blocks, expecting to decipher it with
the same grille, but find that something is wrong. To see quickly
how the presence of several units modifies the case, suppose we
consider some sequence, right or wrong, which is easily examined,
such as the _AVE_ on the second row of the first block. Regardless
of what the transposition is, if all three of these units are
enciphered alike, each of the additional blocks contains a
corresponding trigram in exactly the same location as the one under
consideration; here we have _NES_ in the second block and _ANK_ in
the third. But if the transposition is specifically that of the
grille, each one of the three trigrams _AVE_, _NES_, _ANK_, has a
check-trigram in its own block. Thus we have the six trigrams listed
with their cell-numbers in Fig. 24. Since all of these are acceptable,
we should, in practice, be encouraged to accept them; thus, it may be
well to say here that, in dealing with all ciphers these false
beginnings will quite frequently pitch the decryptor headlong into a
solution, through no act of wisdom on his own part.


         Figure 24

    Straight   Reversed

  7   8   9   28  29  30

  A   V   E    L   I   D
  N   E   S    S   O   B
  A   N   K    N   L   E


Now, in order to arm ourselves against the larger grilles, which are
somewhat more troublesome, and for investigation of cryptograms which
may or may not have been accomplished with a grille, suppose we take
a look at Ohaver’s mechanical method — that is, his use of paper
strips. Picturing any block of 36 cells, numbered consecutively as we
saw these in Fig. 21, let us imagine that there is a grille placed
over this block, and that this grille has only one opening. If the
cell that shows is No. 1, then, at the first turn of the grille, we
uncover cell No. 6; at the next turn, cell No. 36; and, at the final
turn, cell No. 31. We will call this series of cell-numbers an
_index_, and say that the index for this particular aperture is
1-6-36-31. In the first block of the new cryptogram, the letters
which follow this index are _R O P T_. In the second block, the same
index governs the letters _U B V L_, and, in the third block,
_A E X H_. But if the single opening in our hypothetical grille has
exposed cell No. 2, then its _index_, discovered in the same way, is
2-12-35-25, and the corresponding letters, in the three blocks of
this cryptogram are, respectively, _R U E A_, _E I T X_, and
_G S E R_. Similarly, each one of the other seven apertures possible
in this quarter of the grille has an index, expressible in
cell-numbers, and governs a certain series of letters in each
cryptogram block. If the grille is the Fleissner, the index for any
aperture, in a grille of any size, will always contain four numbers,
and will govern four letters per block.

If the grille is a 16-letter one, there will be only four of these
indices, beginning in cells 1, 2, 5, 6. If it is a 36-letter grille,
there will be nine, beginning in cells 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 13, 14, 15.
A 64-letter grille will have 16, beginning in cells 1, 2, 3, 4, 9,
10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 19, 20, 25, 26, 27, 28; and so on to grilles of
100, 144, etc., letters. After one grows accustomed to the
swastika-like route of the open cell, such indices are not at all
difficult to prepare at the moment of need; however, many solvers
prefer to make them up in sets, once for all, and have them ready as
they happen to be wanted. As to the finding of the four letters per
block which follow any one index, it is sufficient to remember that
the cell numbers, arranged in the manner shown, are also the serial
numbers of the letters belonging to any one unit. Thus it is not
necessary to write the units into their squares; we need merely
number the letters of a unit from 1 to 36, and select those having
the desired serial numbers.

Returning, now, to our cryptogram: Our unit appears to be 36, since a
division of this kind distributes the vowels uniformly; and a unit of
36 may have been produced with a grille. If so, this grille had 9
apertures, and we need 9 paper strips, one for each aperture. On each
strip we are to have: the four index numbers, the four corresponding
letters from the first block, the four corresponding letters from the
second block, and the four corresponding letters from the third block.
But since, in each case, the first three cell-numbers or the first
three letters _must be repeated_, our strip will actually contain
seven numbers and twenty-one letters. These nine strips are prepared
all in one set-up, the details of which can be examined in Fig. 25.
In Fig. 26, the strips of Fig. 25 have been cut apart and rearranged
in such a way as to bring out plaintext on the top row of every block;
this is, of course, the first _full_ row, as pointed out in each case
by the four asterisks. It will be noticed that the top row of
cell-numbers is arranged in strictly ascending order (our strictly
horizontal route of writing-in). If the third row be now examined (as
pointed out by two asterisks), it is found that this, too, carries
plaintext, merely written backward, and that here the cell-numbers
are arranged in strictly descending order.


                   Figure 25

              Preparation of Slips

  Index.......  1   2   3   7   8   9  13  14  15
                6  12  18   5  11  17   4  10  16
               36  35  34  30  29  28  24  23  22
               31  25  19  32  26  20  33  27  21
                1   2   3   7   8   9  13  14  15
                6  12  18   5  11  17   4  10  16
               36  35  34  30  29  28  24  23  22

  Block 1...... R   R   T   A   V   E   T   A   D
                O   U   B   A   K   E   H   B   P
                P   E   T   D   I   L   R   R   A
                T   A   C   S   O   R   G   I   E
                R   R   T   A   V   E   T   A   D
                O   U   B   A   K   E   H   B   P
                P   E   T   D   I   L   R   R   A

  Block 2...... U   E   E   N   E   S   R   A   N
                B   I   K   S   D   U   O   F   S
                V   T   O   B   O   S   Y   I   T
                L   X   N   M   T   J   A   U   A
                U   E   E   N   E   S   R   A   N
                B   I   K   S   D   U   O   F   S
                V   T   O   B   O   S   Y   I   T

  Block 3...... A   G   D   A   N   K   O   D   X
                E   S   N   A   S   D   E   S   F
                X   E   X   E   L   N   R   A   O
                H   R   G   R   A   O   A   A   A
                A   G   D   A   N   K   O   D   X
                E   S   N   A   S   D   E   S   F
                X   E   X   E   L   N   R   A   O


Now, to read the cryptogram: Each full row of numbers includes all
cell-numbers belonging to some one of the four units, and any one of
these four rows of numbers is a key to the grille, since it shows
exactly what cells were uncovered when the corresponding unit was
written in. To obtain the grille, we have only to select some one row
of numbers, as 12-36-10-16-34-9-26-32-13, and clip out these
particular cells in a square numbered as we saw it in Fig. 21. The
student who cares to know what “instructions” were being sent might
also satisfy his curiosity as to whether or not this new cryptogram
could have been deciphered rather than decrypted.


                    Figure 26

         One Correct Adjustment of Slips

                           ┌────┐         ┌────┐
                           │  9 ├────┬────┤ 13 │
       ┌────┐         ┌────┤ 17 │  8 │  7 │  4 │
  ┌────┤  1 ├────┬────┤  3 │ 28 │ 11 │  5 │ 24 │
  │  2 │  6 │ 14 │ 15 │ 18 │ 20 │ 29 │ 30 │ 33 │ ****
  │ 12 │ 36 │ 10 │ 16 │ 34 │  9 │ 29 │ 32 │ 13 │
  │ 35 │ 31 │ 23 │ 22 │ 19 │ 17 │ 26 │  7 │  4 │**
  │ 25 │  1 │ 27 │ 21 │  3 │ 28 │  8 │  5 │ 24 │
  │  2 │  6 │ 14 │ 15 │ 18 │    │ 11 │ 30 │    │
  │ 12 │ 36 │ 10 │ 16 │ 34 │    │ 29 │    │    │
  │ 35 │    │ 23 │ 22 │    │  E │    │    │  T │
  │    │    │    │    │    │  E │  V │  A │  H │
  │    │  R │    │    │  T │  L │  K │  A │  R │
  │  R │  O │  A │  D │  B │  R │  I │  D │  G │ ****
  │  U │  P │  B │  P │  T │  E │  O │  S │  T │
  │  E │  T │  R │  A │  C │  E │  V │  A │  H │**
  │  A │  R │  I │  E │  T │  L │  K │  A │  R │
  │  R │  O │  A │  D │  B │    │  I │  D │    │
  │  U │  P │  B │  P │  T │    │    │    │    │
  │  E │    │  R │  A │    │  S │    │    │  R │
  │    │    │    │    │    │  U │  E │  N │  O │
  │    │  U │    │    │  E │  S │  D │  S │  Y │
  │  E │  B │  A │  N │  K │  J │  O │  B │  A │ ****
  │  I │  V │  F │  S │  O │  S │  T │  M │  R │
  │  T │  L │  I │  T │  N │  U │  E │  N │  O │**
  │  X │  U │  U │  A │  E │  S │  D │  S │  Y │
  │  E │  B │  A │  N │  K │    │  O │  B │    │
  │  I │  V │  F │  S │  O │    │    │    │    │
  │  T │    │  I │  T │    │  K │    │    │  O │
  │    │    │    │    │    │  D │  N │  A │  E │
  │    │  A │    │    │  D │  N │  S │  A │  R │
  │  G │  E │  D │  X │  N │  O │  L │  E │  A │ ****
  │  S │  X │  S │  F │  X │  K │  A │  R │  O │
  │  E │  H │  A │  O │  G │  D │  N │  A │  E │**
  │  R │  A │  A │  A │  D │  N │  S │  A │  R │
  │  G │  E │  D │  X │  N ├────┤  L │  E ├────┘
  │  S │  X │  S │  F │  X │    └────┴────┘
  │  E ├────┤  A │  O ├────┘
  └────┘    └────┴────┘


  * * *

Concerning the grille cryptograms which follow, it seems not
impossible that the student who has seen his principles applied only
to a unit of 36 might find some difficulty in adjusting them to
grilles of other sizes. A tip, then, on Example 22: Instead of the
regulation nulls, its single unit was completed with a common Spanish
phrase beginning with _Q_. And if it still resists: the author’s own
name was used as the key for constructing the grille.

In adjusting his paper strips (when this is the method he prefers) it
makes no particular difference what plan he follows, so long as it
works. Some decryptors prefer to concentrate altogether on the
strictly ascending series of cell-numbers, allowing letters to form
their own sequences. Others will always have before them the set-up
of squares, noting there some possible letter-sequence, finding (by
means of their cell-numbers) the strips which contain these letters,
and then observing results in other blocks. If the given strip cannot
be found, then the cell must be already in use.

The shortest road is that of the probable word. For instance, the
set-up shown as Fig. 26 was actually initiated by the solver at the
letter _J_ of the second block, this being a rare letter and almost
invariably followed by a vowel. Of the several vowels immediately in
sight (in the square) the correct one was promptly suggested by the
sequence so plainly in sight, _OB_, suggesting the word _JOB_, one
already used by these people in discussing their mysterious
activities. The corresponding cell-numbers, 20-29-30, were found to
be on three separate strips — a necessary condition — and when placed
together brought out the straight sequences _RID_ and _OLE_, with
reversed sequences _AVE_, _NEU_, and _AND_. Another very probable
word was suggested by the check-sequence _AVE_ (_HAVE_), and the
necessary _H_ was found with cell-number 33, bringing solution to the
point suggested roughly in Fig. 27, where attention was promptly
focussed on the tetragram _RIDG_, suggesting _BRIDGE_, another word
previously used. There were two strips carrying the desired _E_, but
both refused to fit; and here the cell-numbers came into play. The
last one found, 33, was large and suggested that its letter, _G_,
might be the last letter of a unit; afterward, the building was
continued on the left, with _B_.


               Figure 27

     Straight          Reversed

  20  29  30  33     17   8   7   4

   R   I   D   G      E   V   A   H (Have)
   J   O   B   A      U   E   N   O (one u)
   O   L   E   A      D   N   A   E (e and)


22.  By PICCOLA.  (Probable word:  CRYPTOGRAMS).

T S T H E   T T U S H   O E D G F   R D O E O   G R I S A   A M S N M   Q E U G I
B R I E L   N O S T H   S I C L S   E T S W A   T H A B R   Y P A E.

23.  By DAMONOMAD and POPPY.  (Probable word:  RIGHT FLANK).

A E K D S   P V T O O   N N A A O   N R O N P   R O C T I   E H T R E   H N E T I
A F G S R   H T N I L   O V T E F   F A L M K   I E C L A   A S N M.

24.  By DAMONOMAD and POPPY.  (Probable word:  SPECIAL MESSENGER).

E Y U I S   S N S F P   A O P E R   I S C O A   M N R A I   R G A A T   A L I M N
E G E E I   S O S N O   S A D N B   E I T N O   N G U E P   R H T E E   W S R U A
S S K V Y   P I T O N   O U E Y S   O C M W O   T N S T E   U O B D G.

25.  By SAHIB.

R N I I I   N G T F L   A I L N N   D E E T D   R V E U S   E S T H R   E I G E Y
F I A N O   U R R D L   G Y T N H   A E O N R   N E K C D   E E I S E   Y B S E F
W Y P G R   L O L O E   U O F H P   A T V E R   E H E R A   E D G M I   T R H N E
E I S Y T   Q T S I I   S A U S G   I E A I C   A S L L K   L L T T X   H V H E A
R X A X.

26.  By NEMO.

I K O T H   N N E H N   E E I R C   R A G E L   O R N O H   K T W T C   H O H E I
E S S W W   T N E T R   H A R E O   L S P L A   A G E A E   R L D B R   Y E U I T
R T R E N   I D T H E   I A D E I   E N D P D   A B R A E   C R K E M   T A O A U
T O T S Y   N B P E S   N U H E S   R A H E S   U P D.

27.  By DAN SURR.

O L T L A   L I G E R   T I V H E   L L E R K   I E A E I   J F E I Y   Y O O U U
S T H E A   V A S G Y   A S A W C   K E P L U   E Z T I Z   O S I T.

28.  By PICCOLA.  (This is not a grille.  It's a serious matter!)

H S O E S   N P T A E   T O H I S   T W L E D   T T F A I   B T Y U Y   O T C E O
I I T R C   Y S B T R   A H B T E   I D O U S   C I U O K   R O Q N.




CHAPTER VI
Irregular Types — Columnar Transposition

Square units, in actual use, are less convenient than those
rectangular encipherments in which only one dimension of the block
is restricted, thus permitting that a single key govern messages of
many different lengths. We have a more practical cipher in the
columnar transposition of Chapter IV, and this can be rendered
somewhat safer if care be taken to avoid completing the rectangle.
The preparation of such a block is illustrated in Fig. 28, where the
key-word PARADISE is being used to encipher the following text:
REGRET CHANGE IN SYSTEMS BUT THOUGHT ADVISABLE ACCOUNT INCREASED
VOLUME SENT BY AIR.


      Figure 28

  P A R A D I S E
  6 1 7 2 3 5 8 4

  R E G R E T C H
  A N G E I N S Y
  S T E M S B U T
  T H O U G H T A
  D V I S A B L E
  A C C O U N T I
  N C R E A S E D
  V O L U M E S E
  N T B Y A I R X
  X X X . . . . .


First, let us understand the purpose of the four nulls. It
is customary, when cryptograms are to be transmitted by wire
or radio, to make them evenly divisible into five-letter groups.
This usually means the addition of from one to four nulls, and
since the nature of the cipher makes it inadvisable that additional
letters be added to the enciphered cryptogram, any desired nulls
must be added in the block before the columns are
taken off. Another precaution usually recommended is the
avoidance altogether of key-lengths which are divisible by 5,
so that an encipherer is practically never compelled to add a
complete five-letter group in order to leave his rectangle incomplete.
It might be added that our use of letters _XXXX_ is for emphasis only; a
better series would be one of the nature _AAEO_.

The decipherer’s only problem is illustrated in Fig. 29. Knowing the
key, the decipherer knows that there must be eight columns. The
number of letters, 75, divided by 8, results in 9, with remainder 3;
thus, the short columns are to contain nine letters, and there will
be three which contain ten letters. He lays out an 8 x 10 block,
cancels the last five cells, writes his key-numbers across the tops
of the columns, and then begins to copy letters, filling the column
numbered 1, then the column numbered 2, and so on, finally reading
his message by straight horizontals.


      Figure 29

  P A R A D I S E
  6 1 7 2 3 5 8 4

  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _

  ...............
  ...............
  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _
  _ _ _ x x x x x


The cryptogram from this block is shown as Fig. 30, and illustrates
the manner in which the decryptor will number the letters of
practically all cryptograms in order that he may quickly locate any
desired letter, or learn, by subtraction, the distance apart of any
two letters. The decryptor, of course, does not know how many columns
the cryptogram contains, and even after he finds out the key-length,
he still does not know exactly the point at which any one column ends
and another begins.

This form of transposition is among the most fascinating of
decryptment problems, and we shall look at it from several angles.
The simplest case is that in which the decryptor correctly assumes
the presence in his cryptogram of some word or phrase whose length is
greater than that of the key; if this probable word is long enough,
he is able to learn, not only the key-length, but the order in which
to write his columns. Our present cryptogram, for instance, has
key-length 8, and contains two nine-letter words, ADVISABLE and
INCREASED. These two words, repeated in Fig. 31, will show what
happens when a word is long enough to overlap the block. With the
word ADVISABLE, the final _E_ falls below the initial _A_, and when
this column is taken off, the letters _A E_ will stand in sequence in
the cryptogram. Similarly, the word INCREASED will provide, in the
cryptogram, a digram _ID_. Should the decryptor suspect the presence
of either of these words, he would look at once for sequences of this
kind in his cryptogram, and the presence of _AE_ (or _ID_) would tell
him that the key-length is probably 8, which is the distance apart of
the two letters in his probable word.


                                    Figure 30

                      The Cryptogram Prepared for Examination

          5          10          15          20          25          30
  E N T H V   C C O T X   R E M U S   O E U Y E   I S G A U   A M A H Y

         35          40          45          50          55          60
  T A E I D   E X T N B   H B N S E   I R A S T   D A N V N   X G G E O

         65          70          75                                    
  I C R L B   X C S U T   L T E S R                                    


         Figure 31

  6  1  7  2  3  5  8  4
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  A
  D  V  I  S  A  B  L  E
  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  I
  N  C  R  E  A  S  E  D
  V  O  L  U  M  E  .  .


The ideal case is that in which the probable word is long enough to
furnish more than one of these overlapping letters, as shown in Fig.
32 in connection with the “word” INCREASED VOLUME. Suppose that we
have suspected the presence of this expression in our cryptogram, and
have ascertained that the necessary letters are present for forming
it. We consider its letters one by one, in the order _I_, _N_, _C_,
_R_ . . . . and go through the cryptogram, underscoring (or otherwise
noting) all cases in which the given letter is followed immediately
by another of the letters found in the same probable “word.” But, in
considering any one letter, say the letter _N_, we ignore such
sequences as _NT_, _NB_, _NX_, whose second letters, _T_, _B_, _X_,
do not occur in the expression INCREASED VOLUME. Fig. 33 shows
exactly what digrams of this kind can be found in connection with
letters _I_, _N_, _C_, _R_, _E_, and also the distance (or distances)
apart of the two given letters as found in the probable word. Notice
that in connection with every letter there is one digram in which
this distance is 8, the correct key-length of our present cryptogram.
And when these digrams are selected from the tabulation, and set up
vertically with top letters in the order _I N C R E_, the lower five
letters prove up in the order _D V O L U_. In actual work, the
tabulation must sometimes be made, though ordinarily it will suffice
to start directly with the “proving up.”


         Figure 32

    I  N  C  R  E  A  S       
    E  D  V  O  L  U  M       
    E                         

   I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E     
   D  V  O  L  U  M  E        

  I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E  D  V
  O  L  U  M  E               


Now let us go ahead and solve the cryptogram, as shown in Fig. 34. We
will assume, to begin with, that our cryptogram has been prepared at
the top of a sheet, and that our various trials are being made on the
blank space beneath it. We will assume also that, having discovered
key-length 8, we have divided this cryptogram roughly into eight
segments, three of which contain ten letters and the rest nine.

First, we are in possession of a series of embryo columns, shown at
(a), and these can be set up without looking at the cryptogram at all.
Having done this, we turn to the cryptogram, find each one of the
sequences again, and lengthen the columns of our beginning block by
adding to each pair of letters a few of the letters which immediately
precede and follow it. Thus, our block begins to build up as at (b);
and, for each time that a partial column is set up in (b), the segment
which contained it is promptly circled out of the cryptogram itself,
which now begins to assume the appearance indicated at (c). Thus some
words have automatically formed on the new lines which tell us
plainly that the final column must contain a sequence _L T E_,
followed by _S_ or _W_, and the appearance of the cryptogram tells us
plainly where to look for it; the final segment is the only one
having enough letters to furnish another nine- or ten-letter column.


              Figure 33

  Letter Examined &    Distance Apart
   Sequences Found        In Word

    I        IS            6         
             ID            8         
             IR            3         
             IC            2         
    N        NS            5         
             NV            8         
    C        CO            8         
             CR            1         
             CS            4         
    R        RE         1   4  11    
             RA            2         
             RL            8         
    E        EM         9   (6)*     
             EU         8   (5)*     
             EO         6   (3)*     
             ES            2         
  (*)  Distances from the second E

  Proving up:  I  N  C  R  E  .  .  .
      (8)      D  V  O  L  U         


At stage (c), we are practically in possession of the numerical key,
and to show this, the cryptogram segments have been numbered. The
first one, containing _V C C O T X_, has been set up in the partial
block as column 3; thus the third column of (b) should have
key-number _1_. The second segment, containing _S O E U Y E_, has
been set up as column 5, showing that the fifth column of (b) should
have key-number _2_. And so on with the rest, until the eight
key-numbers are standing in the order 4-6-1-7-2-3-5-8. This is shown
at (d), and directly below this, at (e) is the encipherer’s original
key. It can be seen that we are now in very much the same position as
the legitimate decipherer; by making a few trials, each time shifting
one key-number from the left side to the right, we need do little more
than decipher. Usually, however, it is quicker simply to go on and
rough out the block we have already started, and then make the
necessary adjustments, approximately as shown in Fig. 35. Having
noted, in the cryptogram, that there are some unused letters,
_E N T H_, on the left side of segment 1, we assume temporarily that
all other unused letters belong to the segment which follows them,
and add them all, indiscriminately, at the top of the block. Where
this is shown, at the left side of Fig. 35, the true key-numbers, as
found in the cryptogram, have been added above the original reference
numbers, and similarly with the adjusted block on the right.


                                   Figure 34

                         Investigating the Key-length 8

      (a)                                   (b)
                                               1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
       1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8                  4  6  1  7  2  3  5  8
                                               A  D  V  I  S  A  B  .
       I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E                  E  A  C  C  O  U  N  .
       D  V  O  L  U  M  E  ?                  I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E
                                               D  V  O  L  U  M  E  .
                                               E  N  T  B  Y  A  I  .
   (c)                                         X  X  X  X  E  H  R  .
                (1)                     (2)                   (3)      
   E N T H/V   C C O T X/ ¦R E M U/S   O E U Y E/¦ I S G/A U   A M A H/Y ¦
        (4)                     (5)                   (6)        
   T/A E I D   E X/T N¦B   H/B N S E   I R/A¦S T  /D A N V N   X/G¦G E O
      (7)                     (8)
  /I C R L B   X║C S U T   L T E S R
                               x

            (d)  Apparent key-numbers:   4  6  1  7  2  3  5  8

            (e)  True key-numbers:          6  1  7  2  3  5  8  4


With the block roughed out, and knowing that a cryptogram of 75
letters using key-length 8 cannot have columns of any other length
than 9 and 10, the first obvious maladjustment is seen in column 1
(key 4), which has only 8 letters. Since this is the 4th segment of
the cryptogram, its remaining letter (or its remaining two letters)
will have to be found at the end of the third segment or at the
beginning of the fifth (keys 3 and 5), that is, at the bottom, or at
the top, respectively, of the columns originally set up as columns 6
and 7. The selection of _H_ from the bottom of column 6 leaves this
column too short, while the top row of the block shows a gap in
sequence, and evidently needs the _E_ at the end of the second
segment. The lone _R_ which remains at the bottom of column 7 is then
erased and written at the top of column 2, and thus we arrive at the
adjustment shown on the right side of the figure, where the only
remaining operation will be that of transferring the misplaced
nine-letter column to its own side of the block. This final
adjustment shows us the segments of the cryptogram in their key
order: 6-1-7-2-3-5-8-4.


                                Figure 35

                 Forming and Adjusting a Tentative Block
       _4  6  1  7  2  3  5  8              4  6  1  7  2  3  5  8_
       1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8              1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8
             E  G  R     T  C                 R  E  G  R  E  T  C
          A  N  G  E  I  N  S              H  A  N  G  E  I  N  S
       Y  S  T  E  M  S  B  U              Y  S  T  E  M  S  B  U
       T  T  H  O  U  G  H  T              T  T  H  O  U  G  H  T
       A  D  V  I  S  A  B  L              A  D  V  I  S  A  B  L
       E  A  C  C  O  U  N  T              E  A  C  C  O  U  N  T
       I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E              I  N  C  R  E  A  S  E
       D  V  O  L  U  M  E  S              D  V  O  L  U  M  E  S
       E  N  T  B  Y  A  I  R              E  N  T  B  Y  A  I  R
       X  X  X  X  E  H  R                 X  X  X  X

  Column 1 must have another letter, top.  (Found at bottom of Column 6).
        (4)                                                          (3)
  Column 6 must then have another letter, top.  (Found a bottom of Column 5).
        (3)                                                              (2)
  Column 7, bottom, then shows an extra letter, which must be transferred to
        (5)
           Column 2, top.  When these transfers have been made, as shown on
                 (6)
           the right, all that remains is to transfer the short column (1)
                                                                       (4)
           to the right-hand side of its block, raising it by one position.


Having seen the ideal case, the student will understand how the less
perfect example would be handled, or the case in which the probable
word is not long enough to overlap at all. For the latter, he would
attempt to find some word like CRYPTOGRAM, in which there are letters
such as _C_, _Y_, _P_, _G_, _M_, not likely to appear more than once
or twice in a short text. We need not discuss this latter case, since
we are to see something very much like it before the present chapter
ends.

Now, as a preliminary to those cases in which we are unable to find a
probable word, suppose we turn to the back of the book, and make an
inspection of the tool chest. First in importance, and valuable in
ciphers of all kinds, is the digram chart which O. Phelps Meaker has
been kind enough to prepare especially for this text. To learn how
often he encountered any given digram in his 10,000-letter count,
note its first letter in the horizontal alphabet, at the top of a
column, then note its second letter in the vertical alphabet, at the
beginning of a row, and observe the figure which occupies the cell at
the intersection of this column and row. If the digram is _TH_, its
frequency was 315; if the digram is _JN_, the cell is blank. This
does not mean that the digram _TH_ will appear exactly 315 times in
any other 10,000-letter text, or that _JN_ will never be found
(occurring, say, as initials). It merely shows that the digram _TH_
is of remarkably high frequency, while a digram _JN_ is so rare that
it practically never appears. The most commonly occurring digrams of
this chart have been listed on another page in the order of decreasing
frequencies. A list of the principal reversals is also given, with
other data which will be found useful in the majority of ciphers.
Meaker’s digram chart shows also the frequencies found for single
letters in the same text. These are shown at the extreme right, and
were obtained by adding the figures found on the 26 rows of the chart
proper. When such counts are made, every letter in the text is
considered to be the first letter of a digram, and no attention is
paid to the separations between words. Thus the single-letter
frequencies can be found by totalling either the columns or the rows,
which, except for minor discrepancies, will check against each other.

So much for _frequencies_. Now let us take a closer look at
_sequence_. Certain letters, ordinarily those of lowest frequency,
are peculiar in their _contacts_ with other letters. The shining
example, in most languages, is the letter _Q_, followed, almost 100%
of the time, by _U_ plus another vowel; and if it seems, in the
present text, that the significance of _QU_ is being overlooked, this
is simply because the individuality of this digram, like that of the
German _CH_ (_CK_), is so well advertised that even the novice
encipherer finds a way to avoid using it. It is impossible, however,
to avoid all letters having individual preferences. We still have _J_
and _V_, practically sure to be followed by vowels, and _Z_, almost
as sure. We have _X_, nearly always preceded by a vowel, but more
often followed by a consonant. If these are missing from the
cryptogram, we may have letters like _K_, _B_, and _P_, which confine
an enormous percentage of their contacts to vowels; or to vowels and
liquids; or to letters from the high-frequency group _E T A O N I R S
H_. Even among the high-frequency letters themselves we find that _H_
is followed about 75% of the time by either _E_ or _A_, and that it
is preceded largely by _T_, with _S_, _C_, and _W_ as the next
favorites; or we find that _N_ is inordinately fond of vowels on its
left, though with some preference for consonants on its right. All
information of this kind is present in the digram chart, and usually
is known to the decryptor without recourse to a chart.

For the beginner, however, who might like to have it in a more
visible form, another chart, of a kind which we believe has never
before been published, appears on page 220. This is F. R. Carter’s
contact chart, on which every letter of the alphabet has been listed
in the center of the page, with its favorite contact-letters beside
it. The arrangement here is from the center outward; the letters
shown on the left of any given letter are those which most often
precede it, with percentages as found in Ohaver’s digram chart;
letters shown on the right are those which most often follow, with
percentages from the same digram chart. This information was not
completed to the end for every letter, since the only information
wanted is the actual preferences of each letter, or the fact that it
has none. However, the outermost columns will show the complete
percentages of vowel and consonant contacts for all letters as these
were found in one 10,000-letter text. With such a chart before us, it
becomes very easy, in the absence of _Q_, and other particularly
vulnerable letters, to make good use of whatever letters we happen
to have; and it is hoped that this new “contact chart” will prove
sufficiently valuable to justify Carter’s labor in having compiled
it for us. As to the other data in the appendix, the student will do
well to look it over. The list of trigrams is that of the Parker Hitt
Manual, where _THE_ was shown as having been found 89 times in 10,000
letters, the others graduating downward to _MEN_, found 20 times. Now
let us return to our columnar transposition.


             Figure 36

  Key-length    Columns, 75 Letters

  Key  5:  (Impossible under system)

  Key  6:       3 columns of 13
                3 columns of 12

  Key  7:       5 columns of 11
                2 columns of 10

  Key  8:       3 columns of 10
                5 columns of  9

  Key  9:       3 columns of  9
                6 columns of  8

  Key 10:  (Improbable under system)

  Key 11:       9 columns of  7
                2 columns of  6
       (Etc.)


When a digram _QU_ is actually present in a text, or when it is
fairly certain that some other digram may be present, such as the
_YP_ of CRYPTOGRAM (that is, one composed of two infrequent letters),
it is possible to discover (or limit) the key-length by observing the
distance apart of these two letters in the cryptogram. To approximate
such a case, using the foregoing cryptogram (Fig. 30), we will make
use of the digram _VI_, and, in order to be brief, we will assume
that the letter _V_, position 5, is the only one in the cryptogram,
and that the only _I_’s present are those at positions 46 and 61. In
one case the interval which separates _V_ from _I_ is 41, and, in the
other, 56. As a preliminary step, we may discard all key-lengths
which are factors of 75: 3, 5, 15, 25. In addition, we may discard,
for the time being, the key-lengths 10, 20, etc., which are multiples
of 5. Of those left, any very short length, as 2 or 4, is very
improbable. We may consider, then, possible key-lengths of 6, 7, 8,
9, 11, etc., as far as we care to take them.

To make ready for the investigation, we first prepare a sheet of the
kind shown as Fig. 36, where each possible key-length has been used
as a divisor in order to learn the column-lengths for each one in a
75-letter cryptogram.


          Figure 37

       Q U I T E A F  *
       E W F A N S W
       I L L B E D E
       L I G H T E D **
       T O S E E

  *) From F in a short column
  to E in a long column is an
  interval of 5; but from E
  to F is an interval of 4.
  **) From T to E is an
  interval of 5; from E to T
  is an interval of 4.


Now let us picture any text written into any block, as in Fig. 37,
where long columns have five letters and short columns have four.
Considering any digram in the text, as _QU_ at the beginning, its two
letters are separated by exactly one column of length, provided the
letters are counted straight down the columns and columns are taken
in one straight direction, or provided the counting is done strictly
upward with columns always taken in one direction. In the case of
_QU_, this column of separation is a long one (five letters), while,
in the case of _AF_, on the right-hand side of the block, it is a
short one (four letters), but in both cases it is a full column. This
is true, also, of the digram _FE_, which is on two different lines,
presuming that, having counted all the way to the end of the last
column, we start again with the first. If both letters are in short
columns, the interval which separates them is that of a short column,
and if both are in long columns, this interval is that of a long
column. But if one letter is in a long column and the other in a short
column, the separating interval may be long or short, according to
whether the columns are taken in straight order or in reverse order.

If the columns of Fig. 37 should be cut apart, and placed in some
other order, then other columns might be placed between the one
containing _Q_ and its neighbor containing _U_, but these would be
_full columns_, never fractional columns, so that the interval from
_Q_ to _U_ would always be an exact number of full columns.

This is what happens in columnar transposition. If the digram _VI_,
which we intend to consider, was actually present in the original
encipherment block, then, in the cryptogram, its letters _V_ and _I_
are separated by an exact number of columns, long or short or mixed.
Also, if the column containing _V_ was taken off first, the distance
from _V_ to _I_ may include the full number of long columns permitted
by the key-length, but must fall one short of including all of the
short columns; but if the _I_ comes first, the opposite is true. Now,
assuming that the only _V_’s and _I_’s in our cryptogram are those
appearing at positions 5, 46, and 61, we find that if the first of
the _I_’s is considered, the distance from _V_ to _I_ is 41, while,
if the other is the one considered, then this distance is 56. We will
investigate, first, the interval 41.

If _V_ and the first _I_ stood in sequence in the encipherment block,
either as _VI_ or as _IV_, then the interval 41 represents a certain
number of complete columns, and if the digram was _VI_ (since the
_V_-column was evidently taken off first), this interval 41 must not
include the full number of short columns, but may include the full
number of long ones.

Consulting Fig. 36, we find that key-length 6 calls for columns
having 12 and 13 letters, and it is impossible to divide an interval
41 into columns of such lengths. The key-length 7 calls for columns
having 10 or 11 letters, of which only two columns may have the
shorter length; an interval 41 can be divided into the right lengths,
but only if three of the columns are short. Thus, if the first _I_ is
the correct one, the key-lengths 6 and 7 are totally impossible, as
is also key-length 8. The key-length 9, however, calls for columns
having 8 and 9 letters, of which six have the shorter length. An
interval 41 can be divided to produce four short columns and one long
column. Again, the key-length 11 calls for columns having 6 and 7
letters, of which two columns may be short; and an interval 41 will
provide five long columns and one short column. These two key-lengths,
then, 9 and 11, are possible, presuming that the first _I_ is the one
which actually followed _V_. When the other _I_, interval 56, is
investigated in the same way, it is found that the only key-lengths
possible are 8 and 11.

So that if the digram _VI_ is present at all, the key-length must be
8, 9, 11, or something longer. Since the key-length 11 is possible in
both cases, this is the one which tempts; when it fails, the remaining
two can be tried. The student may decide for himself whether a trigram
_IVI_ is possible, considering the distance apart of the two _I_’s. It
will be readily understood how this method, in combination with the
one first explained, could be used, say, in a cryptogram where the
suspected word is CIPHER, with the low-frequency letter _P_ occurring
only once.

  * * *

Totally aside from analysis, there are many ways in which the
key-length can become known, or suspected. If the correspondence is a
military one, it may have been learned by espionage, perhaps through
careless talk on the part of an enlisted man; or, because of careless
habits on the part of the authority providing the keys, in having
confined himself always to certain lengths. Knowing the key-length is
two-thirds of the battle. It enables us, as in our former case, to
mark off the cryptogram into its approximate column-lengths, making
it easier to know the approximate whereabouts of any several letters
supposed to form a sequence. It even enables us to prepare a block,
which, cut apart to form paper strips, will effect a mechanical
solution almost as easily as in the case of the completed unit.

Such a block, for our foregoing cryptogram (Fig. 30), can be studied
in Fig. 38, and is explained as follows: An 8-unit key, used on a
75-letter text, calls definitely for three 10-letter columns and five
9-letter columns, and these columns have become eight segments in the
cryptogram. If all three of the long columns were taken off first,
then the arrangement shown at (a) has every letter in its proper
column. And if all three of these were taken off last, then the
arrangement shown at (b) has every letter in its proper column. With
blocks shown for the two extreme cases, it can be seen that the block
at (c) is a combination-block, in which one of the two extremes has
been superimposed upon the other, so that every column in block (c)
shows every letter which it could possibly have contained. By
concealing the letters of the “cap,” we have a duplicate of block
(a); and by changing the alignment, so as to bring all of the topmost
letters into the same row, we have block (b), with a “cap” attached
at the bottom.


                      Figure 38

     Preparation of Strips for a Known Key-length

  (a)  Long Columns at Left     (b)  Long Columns at Right

    E  R  I  T  B  S  G  C         E  X  Y  A  X  I  X  X
    N  E  S  A  H  T  E  S         N  R  E  H  T  R  G  C
    T  M  G  E  B  D  O  U         T  E  I  Y  N  A  G  S
    H  U  A  I  N  A  I  T         H  M  S  T  B  S  E  U
    V  S  U  D  S  N  C  L         V  U  G  A  H  T  O  T
    C  O  A  E  E  V  R  T         C  S  A  E  B  D  I  L
    C  E  M  X  I  N  L  E         C  O  U  I  N  A  C  T
    O  U  A  T  R  X  B  S         O  E  A  D  S  N  R  E
    T  Y  H  N  A  G  X  R         T  U  M  E  E  V  L  S
    X  E  Y                                       N  B  R

  (c)    Combination Block        (d)  Matching Strips

    1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8            .   . | 8 | .
             a  x  i                  3   .   .   . 
          y  h  t  r  x               .   5   .   4
       x  e  y  n  a  g  x            y   x   x   a
    E  R  I  T  B  S  G  C            e   t   C   h   ←
    N  E  S  A  H  T  E  S            I   n   S   y
    T  M  G  E  B  D  O  U            S   B   U   T
    H  U  A  I  N  A  I  T            G   H   T   A
    V  S  U  D  S  N  C  L        **  A   B   L   E  **
    C  O  A  E  E  V  R  T            U   N   T   I
    C  E  M |X  I| N  L  E            A   S   E   D
    O  U |A  T  R  X| B  S            M   E   S   E 
    T |Y  H  N  A  G  X| R            A   I   R   X
   |X  E  Y                           H   R       T   ←
                                      Y   A       N 


Comparing block (c) with the two above it: If the first column of (a)
was actually a short one, then its last letter, _X_, belongs at the
top of the second column. The making of this transfer would cause the
second column to have eleven letters, so that it would become
necessary also to transfer the last letter of the second column to
the top of the third; this third column would then have too many
letters, and its last letter would have to be transferred to the top
of the fourth, which at present has only nine and may have another.
But if the second column was also short, then there are two of its
letters which belong at the top of column 3. And if this column, too,
was a short one, it has three transferable letters at the bottom.

To prepare such a block, first write the cryptogram as at (a), and
mark off its transferable (uncertain) letters by the following rule:
One for the first column, two for the second, and so on, until the
number is _equal to the number of long columns_, which is the maximum
number possible. But if the final row is more than half filled, _the
maximum will not be reached_, and a check may be made by marking off
letters from right to left: zero for the last column, one for the
next-to-last, two for the third-to-last, and so backward to the number
which equals the number of long columns. Having marked off the
transferable letters, form the “bonnet” by copying these, in each
case, at the top of the following column, preferably making some
clear distinction to show the duplication. For this latter purpose,
many solvers use red ink. In this kind of work, as we saw in a
previous case, the spacing must be accurate both laterally and
vertically, since many of the letters belonging to the same sequence
are not found on the same row. A few of the strips cut from block (c)
have been matched at (d), where the beginning was made from the
common suffix -_ABLE_. The duplicated letters _A H Y_ have shown up
plainly, partly by the style in which the letters are written, and
partly, too, by the fact of consecutive column-numbers, 3 and 4. This
same thing is true of the letters _X T N_, column-numbers 4 and 5.
These numbers, it must not be forgotten, are also the serial numbers
of the cryptogram segments, and thus are the key-numbers. With the
eight strips correctly matched, and any misplaced columns transferred
to their own side of the block, the strip-numbers as they stand
across the top will reproduce the numerical key.

The matching of strips is generally a purely mechanical process, in
which impossibilities are not considered. However, having before us a
block (a) or (b), it is possible to apply the principle used with our
former digram _VI_, and find out in advance whether certain letters
found on two strips can possibly have stood in sequence. Nor is the
cutting apart of the strips really necessary; it is merely a
convenient method for dispensing with mental effort.

Now suppose we consider this same cryptogram on the theory that its
key-length cannot be determined, or restricted to certain
possibilities. Our first step is to select, somewhere in the
cryptogram, a segment which is to be set up vertically on a sheet of
paper to act as a _trial column_. If we select it from the body of
the cryptogram, we shall have to make it a rather long segment, since
we are uncertain as to whether it represents one column or parts of
two. We should do this, however, if the body of the cryptogram shows
_Q_, or any other letter or series of letters likely to be vulnerable.
Otherwise, we know definitely that one of the columns begins with the
first letter of the cryptogram, and that another column ends with the
final letter of the cryptogram, and one or the other of these two
segments is usually chosen, preferably the one containing the largest
number of vulnerable letters. If we have a probable word, and find
that its letter _P_, or _M_, or _G_, is the only one in the
cryptogram, we select the segment which contains this _P_, or _M_,
or _G_.


         Figure 39

  Tests, in Attempting to
    Judge Column-Length

    E G    20    ( 15)
    N G    75    ( 83)
    T E    94    ( 74)
    H O    46    ( 42)
    V I    19    ( 14)
    C C    12    (  6)
    C R     7    ( 12)
    O L    17    ( 36)  
    T B    14    (  8)
    X X     -    (  -)
    R C    14    (  7)
    E S   145    (115)
    M U    13    (  7)
    U T    45    ( 35)
    S L     6    (  9)

  (First column of figures
  is taken from Meaker's
  chart; the second is from
  Ohaver's).


Wherever the trial segment is taken, there is always the question
as to how many letters ought to be included. In Fig. 39, the decryptor
has decided to take the beginning segment of the cryptogram, and has
started with 15 letters. He has written beside it another 15-letter
segment, chosen because of _NG_, _HO_, _VI_, and is attempting to
tell, by the appearance of his digrams, and their frequencies as
taken from two different digram charts, just about how far his digrams
are uniformly good. If the nulls in use are actually _XX_, he knows
immediately that this is the end of his two columns; otherwise, his
digrams are acceptable throughout. If he sets down beside each digram
its frequency as taken from Meaker’s chart, he might decide that his
digrams are good as far as _UT_, depending somewhat on the letters
represented in our _XX_. Using Ohaver’s frequencies, he would feel
sure that his digrams are good as far as _OL_. In many cases the
frequencies shown for the lower digrams will grow so erratic as to be
plainly unlikely; and in other cases, more difficult than the present
one, a check on the probable column-length can be had by preparing a
similar set-up for the end-segment of the cryptogram, in which the
lower digrams are excellent, while those extending upward may grow
erratic. This decryptor is safe, however, in accepting as much or as
little of the length as he likes; there will be a more definite line
of demarcation when he attempts to write beside these a third column
of 15 letters. The only cases which ever give trouble are those in
which a short text has been enciphered with a long key. Key-lengths,
generally speaking, hardly ever run outside of limits 5 to 15, that
is, lengths which come from single words. Thus a tentative key-length
10, 11, 12, lying half-way between these extremes, is always safe to
try. The key-length 10, applied to 75 letters, gives columns of 7 or
8, and, in the discussion which follows, the tentative column-length
was fixed at 8 letters.


                                    Figure 40

   (The numbers assigned to these set-ups merely indicate the order in which the   
                         second segments were taken).                              

     1           8           9          10          11                  2      3   

   E U    7    E Y   17    E B   11    E X   17    E G   20           E S    E O*
   N S   51    N T  110    N N    9    N G   75    N G   75           N O    N E 
   T O  111    T A   56    T S   32    T G    1    T E   94           T E    T U 
  *H E  251   *H E  251   *H E  251   *H E  251   *H O   46           H U    H Y*
   V U    -    V I   19    V I   19    V O    6    V I   19           V Y*   V E 
   C Y    -    C D    -    C R    7    C I   15    C C   12           C E    C I 
   C E   55    C E   55    C A   44    C C   12    C R    7           C I    C S*
   O I   13    O X    -    O S   37    O R  113    O L   17           O S    O G 
        488         508         410         490         290                      
                                                                       4      5  
   (1)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)                          
        488         508         410         490         290           E E    E I 
   H E  251    H E  251    H E  251    H E  251    H O   46           N U    N S 
        237         257         159         239         244           T Y    T G*
                                                                      H E    H A 
   Ranked in the order:   8, 11, 10, 1, 9                             V I    V U*
                            .........                                 C S*   C A
                                                                      C G*   C M*
                                                                      O A    O A
   Same Test, Using Mr. Ohaver's Digram Frequencies: 
                                                                       6      7
      1           8           9          10          11
                                                                      E S    E H*
   E U    6    E Y   24    E B   24    E X   14    E G   15           N G    N Y
   N S   47    N T   97    N N    8    N G   83    N G   83           T A    T T
   T O   92    T A   64    T S   27    T G    -    T E   74           H U    H A
  *H E  305   *H E  305   *H E  305   *H E  305   *H O   42           V A    V E
   V U    -    V I   14    V I   14    V O    9    V I   14           C M*   C I
   C Y    1    C D    -    C R   12    C I   19    C C    6           C A    C D*
   C E   46    C E   46    C A   36    C C    6    C R   12           O H*   O E*
   O I   15    O X    1    O S   35    O R   99    O L   36
        512         551         461         535         282
                                                                     (Set-up No. 2
   (1)         (8)         (9)         (10)        (11)               would have
        512         551         461         535         282           been tested.)
   H E  305    H E  305    H E  305    H E  305    H O   42
        207         246         156         230         240

   Ranked in the order:   8, 11, 10, 1, 9 (as before).


Usually these trials are made by setting up the trial column (in
pencil) several times in succession, so that several of the possible
combinations can be seen side by side, in order to determine which is
best. Sometimes this can be decided by simple observation. Otherwise,
the combinations can be subjected to a digram test. This is made by
setting down beside each digram, as formed by each pair of columns,
its frequency as taken from a digram chart. These figures are then
added in each of the set-ups, and the supposition is that the
combination furnishing the highest frequency-total will be the
correct one, provided this high total has been produced by all of its
digrams collectively, and not by some one or two individual digrams.
With short columns, such tests are never conclusive, but with as many
as ten or twelve digrams they are nearly always dependable, and even
with only five or six digrams they will often select a correct
combination.


                    Figure 41

     1           2           3           4

  Y E   12    D E   39    R E  148    E E   39
  E N  101    E N  120    A N  172    O N  145
  I T   88    X T    1    S T  121    I T   88
  S H   30    T H  315    T H  315    C H   46
  G V    -    N V    4    D V    4    R V    5
  A C   39    B C    -    A C   39    L C    8
  U C   17    H C    2    N C   31    B C    -
  A O    2    B O   11    V O    6    X O    1
       308         492         836         332

                      .....

  Same Test, Using Mr. Ohaver's Digram-frequencies:

     1           2           3           4

  Y E    8    D E   64    R E  139    E E   57
  E N  120    E N  101    A N  168    O N  162
  I T   90    X T    4    S T  119    I T   90
  S H   40    T H  377    T H  377    C H   53
  G V    1    N V    1    D V    1    R V    6
  A C   35    B C    -    A C   35    L C    1
  U C   11    H C    -    N C   34    B C    -
  A O    2    B O   13    V O    9    X O    1
       288         560         882         370


It was decided here to choose as the trial column the first eight
letters of the cryptogram: _E N T H V C C O_. This column is filled
with consonants, indicating that those which follow or precede it
might contain a number of vowels; and of the six consonants present,
practically every one could be called a “vulnerable” letter, or, as
we say in the Association, a “clue-letter.” If we wish, for instance,
to choose a column which will fit well on the right-hand side of this
trial column, we can search the rest of the cryptogram for two
consecutive vowels to follow, respectively, _H_ and _V_, and these
two vowels we should expect to find followed, either immediately or
at interval 2 by some letter (usually a high-frequency one) which
will follow at least one of the _C_’s. This kind of pattern,
unfortunately, was found eleven times. In practice, we should
probably abandon it rather than copy down and test eleven
combinations; here, however, the eleven set-ups can all be seen in
Fig. 40, accompanied by serial numbers to show the order in which
their second columns were taken from the cryptogram. Some of these
have not been tested. Of the five retained, particular attention is
called to the fact that the one having the very lowest total is
actually the correct one, as may be seen by turning back to the
encipherment block. But when a single row of corresponding digrams
(_HE_ in the first four set-ups and _HO_ in No. 11), has been
subtracted throughout, it is seen that No. 11 moves upward toward its
proper rank, having now the second highest total. In practice, it
might even be selected in preference to No. 8, which grows erratic
after its fifth digram (frequencies of 0, 55, 0). But the
column-length 5, in practice, is not unlikely, so that a test made
on the right-hand side of our trial column has not been at all
conclusive.


                   Figure 42

              Trigram Observation

   1        2        3(*)     4        5

  REU      REY    ¦ REB      REX      REG
  ANS      ANT    ¦ ANN      ANG      ANG
  STO      STA    ¦ STS      STG      STE
  THE      THE      THE      THE      THO
  DVO      DVI      DVI      DVO      DVI
  ACY      ACD*     ACR ¦    ACI      ACC
  NCE      NCE      NCA ¦    NCC*     NCR
  VOI      VOX*     VOS ¦    VOR      VOL

      
  (*)  Acceptance of combination 3 would
       entail shortening columns.


Postponing the decision, then, let us take a fresh sheet of paper and
make some tests for columns which can be fitted on the left-hand side
of our trial column. Here, we find that the best “clue-letters” are
_N_ and _H_, standing at interval 2. To precede _N_, we should like
to find one of the vowels of which it is so fond, and to precede _H_,
we hope to find either _T_ or one of the letters _S_, _C_, _W_. That
is, we hope to find a pattern in the rest of the cryptogram in which
some vowel, other than _Y_, is followed at interval 2 by one of the
letters _T_, _S_, _C_, _W_. This time we find only four segments, and
when the test is made for these, as shown in Fig. 41, the resulting
totals point decisively to the correct combination, which is No. 3.
Notice, in both of these tests, that results are identical whether
the frequency-figures are those counted by Meaker or those counted by
Ohaver: In the test of Fig. 40, the five combinations (using either
chart) are ranked in the order 8, 11, 10, 1, 9, while the test of
Fig. 41 has ranked its four combinations in the order 3, 2, 4, 1.
Selecting, then, combination No. 3 of Fig. 41, let us return to the
doubtful tests of Fig. 40 and attempt to effect a combination between
our No. 3 and some one of the five previously considered worth
retaining. Thus we can make an observation of trigrams, as shown in
Fig. 42.


                                 Figure 43

  /E N T H V   C C O/T X   R E M U X   O E U Y E   I S G A U   A M A H Y 

   T A E I D   E X T N B   H B N S E   I/R A S T   D A N V/N   X/G G E O 

   I C R L/B   X C S U T   L T E S R


Here, we must be guided by our judgment, since trigram tests, even
with figures available, would never be feasible on columns of this
length. The acceptance of No. 3, evidently, would mean the cutting of
our column-length to 5 letters, which, as we have said, is not at all
unlikely in an actual case. The two highest tests from Fig. 40,
however, are those included in Nos. 2 and 5. With reference to No. 2,
where the right-hand digrams have the higher total, it is not
impossible that the trigrams _ACD_ and _VOX_ were actually in use, or
that the set-up should be cut, above the trigram _ACD_; but No. 5 is
the one which _carries word-suggestions all the way to the end_.


                                 Figure 44

  (a)             (b)               (c)                 (d)
     A R E G         A R E G R         A R E G R E         X A R E G R E T
     H A N G         H A N G E         H A N G E I         C H A N G E I N
     Y S T E         Y S T E M         Y S T E M S         S Y S T E M S B
     T T H O         T T H O U         T T H O U G         U T T H O U G H
     A D V I         A D V I S         A D V I S A         T A D V I S A B
     E A C C         E A C C O         E A C C O U         L E A C C O U N
     I N C R         I N C R E         I N C R E A         T I N C R E A S
     D V O L         D V O L U         D V O L U M         E D V O L U M E
                                                        ...S
                                                        ...R
                                    (e)

  /E N T H V   C C O/T X  /R E M U S   O E U/Y/E   I S G A U   A M/A H Y 

   T A E I D/  E X/T N B   H B N S E/  I/R A S T   D A N V/N   X/G G E O 

   I C R L/B   X C S U T   L T E S R


  (f)                    (g)                    (h)
     X A R E G R E T        X * R E G R E T        * * R E G R E T   C H
     C H A N G E I N        C H A N G E I N        C H A N G E I N   S Y
     S Y S T E M S B        S Y S T E M S B        S Y S T E M S B   U T
     U T T H O U G H        U T T H O U G H        U T T H O U G H   T A
     T A D V I S A B        T A D V I S A B        T A D V I S A B   L E
     L E A C C O U N        L E A C C O U N        L E A C C O U N   T I
     T I N C R E A S        T I N C R E A S        T I N C R E A S   E D
     E D V O L U M E        E D V O L U M E        E D V O L U M E   S E
     S E N T B Y * I        S E N T B Y A I        S E N T B Y A I   R X
     R X X X                R X X X *              R X X X X
                                                       6 1 7 2 3 5   8 4
                                                       .....(Key).......


With the adding of other columns, which can be done on either side of
the set-up, further digram tests can be made (taken only on the two
extreme right-hand or left-hand columns), but in most cases no further
tests are needed. Considering, for instance, that No. 5 is the
combination tentatively accepted, we need a segment from the
cryptogram containing the _U_ which ought (apparently) to follow
_THO_, then the _S_ or _C_ which ought (apparently) to follow _DVI_;
that is, we want to find a sequence _US_ or _UC_ in the rest of the
cryptogram; and this (apparently) should be followed by two vowels in
succession, to fit after the sequences _ACC_ and _NCR_. In other
words, we know exactly what kinds of letters ought to make up the
column which can be added on the right side of combination 5, and even
the specific letters. Or, if it is the left side on which we have
chosen to fit the new column, we need a segment containing the _A_ of
the apparent _ADVI_, followed at interval 2 by the vowel, probably
_I_, which ought to precede a trigram _NCR_.

In Fig. 43, the three segments of set-up No. 5 have been circled out
of the cryptogram (to prevent further use of their letters), and the
segment chosen to fit on the left side of set-up No. 5 has been
underscored, ready to be circled out in case it is found to fit. It
is now possible to see the suggested nine-letter words, ADVISABLE and
INCREASED, the guessing of which would permit us to apply the easy
method first described.

With or without these guesses, the rest of the solution, as outlined
in Fig. 44, is now plain sailing. At (a), the underscored segment of
Fig. 43 is in place. At (b), the column containing the desired _US_
and following vowels has been set up on the right, where we seem to
need the _E_ or _A_ of ADVISE or ADVISABLE, followed immediately by
the _U_ or _R_ of ACCOUNT or ACCORD. At (c), we have found the
segment, and at (d) (usually earlier), we are introduced to the
actual lengths of our columns.


               Figure 45

         The OHAVER CV-VC Test:

  RATEB   OWSTT   EETOP   UUIMC   YUAOG
  AIOIA   OBSTB   BAKAR   YYEDT   UWYNT
  NNFKG   FJSOT   WYQAR   IROIH.

    TT       TO  cv   TM       TE  cv
    WO  cv   WP       WC       WD
    YP  vc   YU       YY       YT  vc
   (QU)     (QU)     (QU)     (QU)
    AU       AI       AA       AW  vc
    RI  cv   RM       RO  cv   RY  cv
    IM  vc   IC  vc   IG  vc   IN  vc
        4        2        2        5

  The following is the original cryptogram
  used by Mr. Ohaver for demonstration:

  TVYIE   TRROR   EHNIA   EUDSR   IEONI
  ORENA   EEORP   TEALO   LTSUH   LHQNO
  UCADD   CSAAE   TDVFU   GNNYC   YI.

  (Reprinted from Detective Fiction Weekly
   of October 8, 1927, with permission of
         The Frank A. Munsey Company).


This latter can be seen by looking at the cryptogram (e), where all
segments, as soon as selected, have been circled out. In finding a
column which would complete the very evident word SYSTEM and, at the
same time, furnish a letter suitable to precede _HA_, we find that
this is the end-segment of the cryptogram, and would leave only two
letters — far fewer than the number needed for furnishing another
column.

At (f), we have extended the rest of the columns by two (and one)
letters, except that there is a gap in sequence on the next-to-last
line. At (g), we have transferred the letter which will fill this gap,
leaving a misplaced _X_ at the top; and, at (h), we have placed this
_X_ where it belongs and are now ready to transfer the two misplaced
columns and recover the key. This key, as before, is found by
numbering the segments of the cryptogram, and assigning these
key-numbers to the correct columns in the adjusted block. It is
usually possible to go further, and learn the long words on which
such keys might have been based.

Concerning digram-tests, Ohaver suggests another which is more
quickly made than the frequency test, and which the writer, so far,
has found fully as reliable. Using “C” for “consonant” and “V” for
“vowel,” he speaks of this as his VC-CV or “mixed” test. A digram
like _HA_ is a _cv_ digram, one like _AT_ is a _vc_ digram, and
others are _vv_ and _cc_ digrams. His theory is this: Since almost
two-thirds of the digrams used in the language will be of _mixed_
formation, that is, either _vc_ or _cv_ digrams, it stands to reason
that the set-up containing the largest number of “mixed” digrams
would probably be the correct choice. The student may look it over in
Fig. 45.

  * * *


                                 Figure 46

                           The Myszkowsky Cipher

  (a)     Keyword:  CURTAINS

       C  U  R  T  A  I  N  S  C  U  R  T  A  I  N  S  C  U  R  T  A
       4 19 11 16  1  7  9 14  5 20 12 17  2  8 10 15  6 21 13 18  3
       R  E  G  R  E  T  C  H  A  N  G  E  I  N  S  Y  S  T  E  M  S

       Cryptogram:  E I S R A   S T N C S   G G E H Y   R E M E N   T.

  (b)     Keyword:  PARADISE

       P  A  R  A  D  I  S  E  P  A  R  A  D  I  S  E  P  A  R  A  D
      14  1 17  2  7 12 20 10 15  3 18  4  8 13 21 11 16  5 19  6  9
       R  E  G  R  E  T  C  H  A  N  G  E  I  N  S  Y  S  T  E  M  S

       Cryptogram:  E R N E T   M E I S H   Y T N R A   S G G E C   S.


As to possible variations, a cipher with a new name is not necessarily
a different cipher. Fig. 46 shows a cipher originated many years ago
by the cryptologist E. Myszkowsky, and advertised by its inventor as
non-decryptable. The key-word here is repeated often enough to furnish
one key-letter for each text-letter, nulls being added, when
necessary, to prevent the complete unit which would result if key-word
and text were allowed to end at the same point. This long series of
key-letters is then treated as a single word, and is converted to a
numerical key in the usual way, all _A_’s receiving the first numbers,
all _B_’s the next numbers, and so on. The message of the figure is
very short: REGRET CHANGE IN SYSTEMS. Try enciphering this in the
ordinary columnar transposition, using first the key-word CURTAIN,
which contains no repeated letters, and afterward the key-word
PARADISE, which has a repeated letter _A_. In the second case, what
happens to the two columns belonging to the _A_-numbers? Suspecting
a Myszkowsky encipherment, how could you go about unscrambling the
two? Suppose there were three?

Fig. 47 plays another variation on the columnar theme. This cipher,
originated by a member of the _American Cryptogram Association_,
follows the rules of columnar transposition in all respects except
that pairs alternate throughout with single letters (The text is:
CHIEF WANTS YOU TO INTERVIEW SMITH). Can you pick out at a glance the
really vulnerable feature of this cipher, and formulate a special
method for its solution?


                  Figure 47

       The "AMSCO" Cipher (A.M.Scott)

         R    A    C    K    E    T
         5    1    2    4    3    6

         CH   I    EF   W    AN   T
         S   YO    U   TO    I   NT
         ER   V    IE   W    SM   I
         T   HX

       Order for taking off:

         I  YO  V  HX  /  EF  U  IE  /...

  Cryptogram:  I Y O V H   X E F U I.....


29.  By NEMO.  (A military message).

A O T O I   N E H T C   T O T L I   I A W G E   L P R V L   R I I R I   U A D E O
W L R R R   L C M E O   N P E P T   A V T S O   H O E E N   L S N P S   S B Y T S
L R O P D   R G E T S   S T S Y A   W N E.

30.  By PICCOLA.  (Hostilities?)

T A M L R   I T E D W   E E D H H   N P W O S   W R S H C   N O I E D   O H I L T
C S T N I   W A A R C   D H H D A   I E T P T   R L R O W   A S E E T   A K F P W
G M A T X   E K A H D   P I L E O   F H W G I   N H A K S   F S S A A   A H E H N
D H H E H.

31.  By AMSCO.  (The "AMSCO" Cipher).

N W L E L   N T L C S   L W D L Y   L N S O O   I D F I N   R U C H A   L N D C B
S I D E A   I T E T I   K S T B E   E O U T J   A T I L I  A C O R E  A Y E E G  A O.

32.  By PICCOLA. (Can you recover this nice long keyword from the numbers?)

Y K I E T   N T H H E   X I A E N   U B A K E   E W S C S   I H T N L   N E N E A
K I E O B   O L I E E   A M C I F   T I N A H   S K A N I   D L G S O   E E I T T
S W H L L   E U A D H   F S H A B   E O E N O   A N O S C   P H S N O   D H T X R
N H R E A.

33.  By PICCOLA.  (An easy Myszkowski.  Probable words:  SOLVE, CIPHER, COLUMN).

V I N S R   C F E A E   O O H S E   F H L E T   F H U N S   T N C L T   S L C I A
E E S H R   H S I R E   T T M T S   E T E P D  T S O I N  M R T T H  T L O L R  U B E.

34.  By PICCOLA.  (Nothing like a bit of "philosophy" - oyeah?)

E L O S W   E A H X P   N N T R N   H L W I E   G E I G E   A E Q A G   L E A R R
Q L O N K   E S Q L O   R N X A R   S P X S E   E A E I P   A G L R E   P R Y M T
H N K S E   I X X A Y.

35.  By PICCOLA.  (Not so easy; still, it's just another columnar).

H R O T E   T E T E H   I W E O T   T D A O D   K G DT C   E R A I W   O S Y N H
Y R H T W.




CHAPTER VII
General Methods — Multiple Anagramming, Etc.

In the past few chapters, we have been looking at all of the general
methods for decryptment of transpositions. We have seen the use of
_factoring_, which determines, for the geometric cipher, what
key-lengths are possible, and, for the irregular one, what
key-lengths are not. _Vowel-distribution_ has enabled us, in some
cases, to determine the length of major units, or has assisted in the
restoration of minor units to their original intact groups.
_Anagramming_ has been seen throughout: the matching of letters and
columns with or without the application of language statistics.

So far, we have been materially assisted by advance knowledge as to
what the cipher is. Where the type is unknown, and cannot be promptly
identified, and assuming, of course, that the decryptor has no
probable words, transpositions, taken as a whole, present confusing
problems in the very multiplicity of their possibilities. General
Givierge, in his _Cours de cryptographie_, remarks of this case that
novices, as a rule, display a tendency to recoil from the cryptogram
as if uncertain “which end to pick it up by.” He adds that the best
advice he can give is to pick it up _somewhere_ and do _something_,
rather than be satisfied to sit all day long and admire the
cryptogram!

As to how a type may sometimes be identified, the difference between
the regular and irregular types is ordinarily suggested by the number
of letters contained in the cryptograms. Irregular types, intended
for practical purposes, are nearly always seen in complete
five-letter groups, where the geometric cipher usually results in a
broken group at the end of its cryptogram. This, of course, is never
mandatory upon the encipherer; it merely happens because the only
persons making use of such ciphers are those who do not realize the
advisability of doing otherwise.

Among the irregular types, a columnar formation can usually be
spotted by the “bunching” of vowels at intervals throughout the
cryptogram. Then, too, we are still to see those cases in which the
exact type of the cipher may not become apparent until after solution
is well started.

It is usually well, when a new system is encountered, to analyze it
and find out what the transposition finally does to the letters. This
can be done by preparing actual cryptograms in which the plaintext
letters are serially numbered; or, if the question of
vowel-distribution is not involved, by using the serial numbers
without the letters, as suggested in a previous chapter. Many
ciphers, of course, will not require even this amount of analysis,
even though their type, accurately speaking, is irregular. For
example, the one shown as Fig. 48, whether or not its rectangle is to
be completed, is merely another _route_, so that once having seen it,
we might try to follow this route again. But the student who cares to
give this cipher his careful consideration must notice that its
longer cryptograms would be full of reversed plaintext segments; that
these would grow longer and longer with a constant rate of increase,
and would always alternate with incoherent segments which, in their
turn, would grow shorter and shorter; also that these incoherent
segments, if set up as columns, would show plaintext.

The complete-unit cipher, generally speaking, can hardly present any
real complexities. Consider, for instance, the following variation on
a Nihilist encipherment, which was proposed by Geo. C. Lamb, the
author of Chapter X: The key-length, to begin with, must be divisible
by 3, but this is not used for writing-in. The plaintext is written
into its block, not in straight order, but following a _route_ which
begins in the upper left corner and goes forward for the first three
letters, drops down to the second line and runs backward for the next
three letters, drops to the third line to run forward for another
three, and so on back and forth until the first three columns have
been filled with trigrams written alternately forward and backward.
It then moves over to the second three columns, beginning this time
at the bottom and “snaking” upward to the top. For the third three
columns it moves downward again, and so on until the square block has
been filled. After this very devious primary transposition, the unit
is taken off by means of the key, on the Nihilist principle of
transposing both columns and rows with the same key.


             Figure 48

  Cipher Requiring Little Analysis

           1  2  3  4  5...

           T│ H│ W│ S│ E│
          ──┘  │  │  │  │
           S  I│ O│ E│ .│
          ─────┘  │  │  │
           D  L  U│ E│ .│
          ────────┘  │  │
           B  O  T  M│ .│
          ───────────┘  │
            ←    .  .  .│
          ──────────────┘

  Plaintext:  THIS WOULD SEEM TO BE...

  Cryptogram:  T H W S E   S I O E....


We believe that the resulting cryptogram could prove puzzling to any
cryptanalyst who has met the cipher for the first time. It is true
that he has, in the original square, a large number of intact minor
units, provided he can restore them. But these units are very tiny,
and the several of them which stand on any one row are not continuous
among themselves; thus his vowel-distribution, while approximately
normal, would probably not satisfy his expectations. If, however,
having failed to find a more satisfactory block arrangement, he
attempts to match columns (it being remembered that he is accustomed
to reading in all sorts of directions in order to discover plaintext
fragments), he will most certainly discover the trigrams and trace
their route. Afterward, however, having met and analyzed the cipher,
it would probably occur to him to look for exactly this complexity
whenever he discovers that he is dealing with a square whose
key-length is divisible by 3. We have mentioned before the assistance
which may be had from the mere knowledge that a certain method exists.

Complete-unit ciphers, of course, may be troublesome, but their
complexities are necessarily confined to one small area. An irregular
cipher, on the other hand, usually involves the entire text, and its
complexities may be real. In this class we occasionally find ciphers
in which a single cryptogram is impossible to break; and we find
others in which the eventual solution of one cryptogram will not
instantaneously provide the key to another enciphered exactly like
it. Such ciphers are well worth analyzing, for surely, somewhere,
they have their weaknesses; and most certainly any two cryptograms
enciphered exactly alike should be decipherable with the same key.

The cipher shown in Fig. 49 is of the double-columnar type known in
this country as the “United States Army” double transposition, and
has, in fact, been authorized for use, under suitable conditions, in
the military service of more than one country. As may be seen from
the figure, this cipher is, in all respects, the columnar
transposition of the preceding chapter accomplished twice in
succession on the same text (decipherment being, as usual, the
reversal of the encipherment process). The same rules apply here, as
in the single columnar transposition, to the use of nulls, and to the
advisability of avoiding the key-length which is a multiple of 5. It
goes without saying that the block should never, under any
circumstances, be allowed to work out as a square; this, in substance,
would be the block unit of the Nihilist cipher. While the figure
shows a primary cryptogram, taken off from the upper block, this, in
practice, is never actually done. The columns of the upper block are
always transferred direct to the rows of the lower one, and only the
columns of the lower block are taken off as an actual cryptogram. In
preparing this cryptogram, both blocks should be laid out at the same
time; otherwise, there is danger that the operator may apply the first
transposition and forget the second, thus sending out a simple
columnar transposition which carries the key to all of his other
cryptograms. This cipher, as may be seen, has its points. Yet it will
have been noticed that its use for military purposes was not
authorized without restrictions.


                    Figure 49

  The "United States Army" Double Transposition

     1st Encipherment

  P  A  R  A  D  I  S  E
  6  1  7  2  3  5  8  4

  R  E  G  R  E  T  C  H   Primary Cryptogram
  A  N  G  E  I  N  S  Y
  S  T  E  M  S  X  X  X      (Not usually
  X                            taken off)

     2d Encipherment        ENT, REM, EIS, HYX,
                              TNX, RASX, GGE, CSX.
  P  A  R  A  D  I  S  E
  6  1  7  2  3  5  8  4

  E  N  T  R  E  M  E  I
  S  H  Y  X  T  N  X  R
  A  S  X  G  G  E  C  S   Final Cryptogram:
  X

  N H S R X, G E T G I, R S M N E, E S A X T, Y X E X C.


The special hazards of military correspondence have already been
mentioned: the huge volume of interceptable cryptograms; the
ever-present knowledge as to probable subject-matter and
more-than-probable words, including numbers and dates; the personal
habits of individual operators; above all, the fact that much of the
enciphering is necessarily done by operators who are not, in the
first place, trained for their work, and who, very often, must
perform this work rapidly under conditions which are far from
conducive to clear thinking. These, however, are chiefly the hazards
of the firing line. Back of the lines, where hazards are reduced,
there may be a chance that a cryptogram will not be intercepted at
all. It becomes possible, for many purposes, to make use of a cipher
in which a single cryptogram, though probably read in the end, will
resist the decryptor for the necessary length of time, several hours
or several days. The double columnar transposition can be very
resistant, especially when the key is long and the columns short, and
can be made even more complicated by carrying it through still a
third block, perhaps using a different key with each new block.

Why, then, would it not be possible to use such a cipher for general
communication? To this, there are two answers. For transposition
cipher, taken as a whole, has two very serious drawbacks.

First, a transposition, in order to be a good one, must be a
transposition of the whole text, and not a series of short individual
transpositions. Thus, it becomes possible that an error, either in
the encipherment or in the transmission, will not be confined to one
small area, but will garble the whole message. In this way, we have
not only the delay during which the legitimate decipherer is
attempting to decrypt his own message, but, should he fail, the
danger which lies in having it repeated. The decryptor who has been
provided with both the correct and the incorrect version of a same
cryptogram, is often able to figure out both the system and the key.

The other drawback is the danger which lies in the fact of so very
many cryptograms. These, originating at many different sources, and
all enciphered with the same key, will invariably include many of
_identically the same length_. The nature of transposition cipher
makes it inevitable that when any two texts of exactly the same
length are enciphered with the same key, they will follow exactly the
same route. The first letter in both messages will be transferred to
exactly the same serial position in both cryptograms; the second
letter in both will be transferred to another same serial position,
and so on. If we are able to match correctly any two or three letters
in one of the cryptograms, the two or three corresponding letters of
the other cryptogram will also be correctly matched and will serve as
a check. This being the case, any two or more cryptograms which are
found to have the same length can be written one below another so as
to place corresponding letters in the form of columns, and the
problem is reduced to one of _geometric_ columnar transposition.

With ciphers of the complete-unit type, the same thing can be done
having several of the major units. We have, say, a single cryptogram
accomplished with a Fleissner grille, and taken off by spirals. It
may be that nulls were added in the final group, or at the beginning,
or the final unit may have been left incomplete (by blanking out the
unwanted portion of the final grille-block). In spite of these
possibilities, the unit-length, known to be a square based on an even
number, can be determined — _or assumed_ — and the placing of the
several units one below another provides columns made up of
corresponding letters. It is even possible, at times, to apply this
process, with suitable modifications, to several cryptograms whose
length is only approximately the same. It has been done, for instance,
with cryptograms from Sacco’s indefinite grille, mentioned in Chapter
III (General Sacco himself has explained the modifications). Such a
process is ordinarily referred to as multiple _anagramming_, and we
have already seen, in the case of the grille, how it may be modified
so as to take full advantage of any inherent weaknesses when the
cipher is known.

For discussion of the general case, suppose that we have intercepted
a number of cryptograms (seen, by their letter-frequencies, to be
transpositions), and that among these we have been able to find five
in which the length is 25 letters. Since all of these have been
coming from the same two stations, and within a comparatively short
period of time, it seems reasonable to suppose that at least a portion
of them have been enciphered with the same key, and, upon this
assumption, we have written the five cryptograms one below another so
as to set up the 25 columns shown in Fig. 50. We wish now to
rearrange the 25 columns in such a way as to bring out plaintext on
every row, or, failing that, on some of the rows. Once the set-up has
been prepared, we may arrive at our goal by any road that suits our
fancy. The majority of solvers will simply cut the columns apart and
start matching strips at random; and this, probably, is a good enough
method, especially when columns are so short. The writer, personally,
prefers to leave the set-up intact, at any rate until solution is
well started, trying out in pencil the various possible
column-combinations, and circling out accepted columns from the
set-up in the same way in which segments were circled out of
cryptograms in the preceding chapter.


                                   Figure 50

  A series of five cryptograms prepared as columns:

  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25

  C  D  D  N  C  A  A  R  T  H  L  O  I  K  A  O  E  R  T  L  S  N  A  N  O
  D  A  I  T  E  L  O  C  W  A  I  U  X  D  N  T  Y  M  I  N  M  O  E  Y  O
  B  T  O  A  T  T  U  T  O  C  F  L  I  Y  K  X  N  E  I  O  S  B  F  Y  Y
  T  A  R  O  T  O  R  E  I  L  N  A  O  H  R  I  O  N  M  D  S  R  J  Y  S
  W  E  K  L  N  C  H  T  S  T  S  I  E  G  E  I  H  O  O  P  D  T  N  A  O


For those who like this method, we repeat a suggestion which has
already been made: Many columns are usually present in such a set-up
which contain _more than one_ of the “clue-letters,” as here, for
instance, column 14 is practically made up of them. Such a column
makes a good point of beginning, since we may search the set-up, not
for some single letter, but for a pattern made up of several. For
column 14, specifically, we might examine the top row of letters,
pausing whenever we come to one of those letters frequently preceding
_K_, and examining the rest of its column to find out what letter
would have to precede _H_ on the fourth row. We may fail with the
first such column, but not with all.

Another particularly good method, and one which might work in the
present case in spite of the very brief columns, is that of finding
the particular column which contains the first letters of all the
messages. Well over half of the initials used in the language will be
found in the group _T A O S W C I H B D_, and with a frequency in
somewhat that order. Any column made up entirely of these particular
letters may be the one which begins the messages; and when this can
be found, it pays to remember that a vowel is practically always
present among the first three letters of each message.

As to finding the end-segment, it seems that this would be of little
value except in those cases where final groups are not completed.
However, the letter _E_ has a great fondness for final positions,
with terminals restricted largely to the group _E S T D N R Y O_; and
it is also true that many encipherers make a habit of completing their
final groups with such letters as _X_ and _Q_.

Aside from the general case, each individual case carries clues of its
own, and the finding of these must depend upon the detective ability
(or experience) of the decryptor. Here, for instance, we find that the
letter _K_ has appeared three times in only 125 letters of text. This
letter, normally, has one of the lowest frequencies in the language,
and often is not found at all in 125 letters of text. Finding it
three times, then, rather suggests the presence of some one word, a
word so important to the subject-matter that it has been used in
three different messages.

When considering the letter _K_, the first combination which comes to
mind is a digram _CK_ preceded by a vowel; and the letter _C_, also,
is not a letter which we expect to find in confusing numbers. When an
examination of the set-up shows that, for each of the _K_’s, there is
a _C_ present on the same row, we are inclined to accept the
hypothesis of a repeated word. In practice, we should pick out the
three columns containing _K_, place beside each one a column which
will set the digram _CK_ together, and _build on all three
combinations simultaneously_ to the point at which the supposed word
appears or is proved non-existent. Following out only one of these,
let us consider column 14, where _K_ is on the top row. On this row
we find that _C_ has appeared twice. Both of the _C_’s are tried with
_K_, as shown in Fig. 51; we find that both combinations will provide
acceptable digrams, but there is little doubt as to which we would
select. Combination 1-14 is merely acceptable, while combination 5-14
provides a very accurate description of the column which would fit
best on its left. There should be a vowel on the top row, to precede
_CK_, and another on the bottom row, to precede _NG_. After that,
perhaps another vowel should be found on the fourth row, to precede
_TH_, or perhaps, in this case, an _S_, since the list of frequent
trigrams includes a sequence _STH_; and, finally, something suitable
to precede _TY_, which appears to be a syllable, but may belong to
two different words. The five columns which will meet these
requirements have been added in Fig. 52. In this figure, two
combinations may be discarded, because of trigrams _KTY_ and _YTY_.
The others appear acceptable. At this point, however, the sequence
_XTY_ of combination 16-5-14 begins to draw attention because of its
very few possibilities (SIXTY, NEXT YEAR, etc.), making it likely
that one of these will quickly select or discard the entire
combination. For building SIXTY, row 3 of the set-up contains two
_I_’s and one _S_. The two _I_’s, columns 13 and 19, when inspected
visually, are found to bring out, on the top row, the two sequences
_I O C K_ and _T O C K_, while the _S_, column 21, brings out, on the
top row, another _S_, which would extend these, respectively, to read
_S I O C K_ and _S T O C K_, the latter surely the more acceptable.
The results of these additions, with subsequent development, can be
examined in Fig. 53. The completion of the word SIXTY has brought out
also: STOCK, _MITED_, SMITH, DOING. The presence of the word STOCK
suggests extending the sequence _MITED_ to read LIMITED, and the
addition of two more columns on the left brings out another CK,
suggesting another appearance of the word STOCK. The chances are that
we have already been building on this other word STOCK, but if not,
we may build it now to the point shown in the figure, where the top
row suggests RAILROAD STOCK, the third row, FIFTY TO SIXTY, and the
second may or may not suggest MEXICO. Thus we are well on our way to
solution, and have not once had recourse to a long prepared list of
probable words: _division_, _regiment_, _battalion_, _attack_,
_advance_, _report_, _forward_, _artillery_, _ammunition_,
_communication_, _enemy_, _signal_, _retreat_, _troops_, and so on.


    Figure 51

  1-14     5-14

   C K     C K
   D D     E D
   B Y     T Y
   T H     T H
   W G     N G


                   Figure 52

  12-5-14  13-5-14  15-5-14  16-5-14  25-5-14
   O C K    I C K    A C K    O C K    O C K
   U E D    X E D    N E D    T E D    O E D
   L T Y    I T Y    K T Y    X T Y    Y T Y
   A T H    O T H    R T H    I T H    S T H
   I N G    E N G    E N G    I N G    O N G


            Figure 53

  11  8 25  6  3 21 19 16  5 14
   L  R  O  A  D  S  T  O  C  K
   I  C  O  L  I  M  I  T  E  D
   F  T  Y  T  O  S  I  X  T  Y
   N  E  S  O  R  S  M  I  T  H
   S  T  O  C  K  D  O  I  N  G


Naturally, there are times when the matching of the columns, for one
reason or another, proves troublesome. We are thrown off by errors,
by the presence of nulls, initials, abbreviations, etc., or by the
encipherer’s use of cover-up devices, such as the writing of _YH_
instead of _TH_. Or we find that the handling of many paper strips,
caused by message length, is awkward and confusing. But if, in the
eyes of the decryptor, there is any good reason for finding out the
contents of such messages, he can always succeed, even with only two
letters per column.

So far, nothing has been said about helping ourselves to the serial
numbers of the columns, which, during the rearrangement of letters,
are automatically forming in a certain sequence across the top of the
set-up. Regardless of the cipher, it can do no harm to examine these,
and find out what information, if any, they are able to give. In some
cases, they will provide us with both the system and its key,
enabling us to throw away the strips and start deciphering. Suppose,
for instance, we have correctly matched sixteen columns, and find
their numbers in the following order:
31-10-24-37-17-3-32-11-25-38-18-4-33-12-26-39. A careful examination
shows that the numbers are running in sets of six. After the first
six are passed, the next six have repeated them with an increase of
1, and another six appear to be forming up which will repeat them
with an increase of 2. We may verify this by finding the columns
which have numbers 19-5-34-13, etc., and, if the set-up continues to
show plaintext, we know that we are dealing with a simple columnar
transposition. Notice that if the above series were marked into
segments of six numbers each, and the segments placed one below
another, we should have _six columns_, each one made up of numbers
which are consecutive. Thus, we may sometimes learn from a series of
numbers: (1) the system, which is straight columnar transposition;
(2) the key-length, which is 6; and (3) the key itself, which, taking
the six numbers according to size, is 5-2-4-6-3-1, possibly with the
wrong numbers coming first, though it happens that in this case they
do not. This is our old friend SCOTIA, used on forty numbers, in case
the student cares to verify it.

The trail of the columns is not so plain where a second transposition
has done something to the first. But it is still present; the most
complex of ciphers has method of some kind, provided we can find it.
Consider, for instance, the series of numbers,
11-8-25-6-3-21-19-16-5-14, which has been forming in Fig. 53.
Examination here shows pairs of consecutive numbers, 11-8, 6-3, and
19-16, all having the same numerical difference of 3; that is, the
plan of our present encipherment, whatever it is, has, on three
separate occasions, caused some plaintext digram to appear in the
cryptogram reversed, and with its letters three positions apart.
Irrespective of the type of transposition, this constant numerical
difference of 3 might be found again; perhaps we can set some two
columns together correctly simply by _reproducing this numerical
difference_ in the two column-numbers. A glance ahead at the next
figure will show that we actually could, by setting together columns
12-9 or columns 20-17. Where we cannot discover a repeated numerical
difference, perhaps we can discover a progressing difference, or some
other signs of regularity.

Now, returning to the particular case, let us pass on to Fig. 54, in
which the matching of the 25 columns has finally been completed, and
make a careful comparison between the two numerical series 12-9-10-15
and 20-17-18-23. What can these represent but the _fragments of four
columns_, belonging to a _first encipherment block_, which have been
laid down along the _rows_ of a _second encipherment block_, and taken
out in slices? And since the lineal distance apart of any pair of
numbers, as 12 and 20, is seen from the figure to be six positions,
it would be possible, by writing the series of numbers in lines of
six numbers each, to place each pair of corresponding numbers in a
same column. The trail, usually, is not so wide, but there is little
doubt here that we have been dealing with a case of double columnar
transposition in which the key-length of the original block was 6. We
shall come back to this in a moment.

Suppose, now, we give our attention to the various series of numbers
which appear in Fig. 54, and make sure that we understand what they
are. The numbers running across the tops of the columns were,
originally, the _serial numbers of cryptogram letters_ (or columns).
When we restored these letters to their plaintext order, we
disarranged their serial numbers, causing these to come out in the
order 1-7-24-22-12-9, etc. This series, then, is made up of
_cryptogram serial numbers_. But it is also a _key_, since it shows
us exactly the order in which we might _take off a plaintext_ in
order to form a cryptogram. It is a key of the Myszkowsky type,
according to which every letter in the text has its individual
key-number, as we saw in Fig. 46 (imagine that encipherment
accomplished twice in succession). We do not desire, however, to take
off plaintext. And, to use this same key on a cryptogram, we should
have to use it in the _writing-in_ manner; that is, first lay out the
series of key-numbers, and then, taking the cryptogram letters in
their 1-2-3 order, place them, one by one, below their key-numbers.
But once the plaintext has been restored, the _plaintext letters_
(or columns) _may also have serial numbers_, and these new serial
numbers, in the figure, have been added at the bottoms of the
columns. Should we now restore these columns to the order in which we
found them, that is, to their cryptogram order, each column taking
with it its new serial number, we should find, running across the
bottom of the set-up, another mixed series of numbers in the order
1-10-20-9-24, etc., which is a different order from that of the
cryptogram numbers, and this new series is made up of _plaintext
serial numbers_. This is the other key, having the same relationship
to the first as that explained in connection with the short Nihilist
key. Applied to the plaintext, it would have to be used in the
_writing-in_ manner; used on the cryptogram, it serves for
_taking-off_. Thus we are able to recover from our reconstructed
plaintext two long keys, either one of which will serve to decipher
additional cryptograms, _but only on condition that these new
cryptograms contain exactly 25 letters_.


                                   Figure 54

      The Columns of Figure 50, After Solution by Multiple Anagramming:

  1  7 24 22 12  9 10 15  4  2 20 17 18 23 13 11  8 25  6  3 21 19 16  5 14

  C  A  N  N  O  T  H  A  N  D  L  E  R  A  I  L  R  O  A  D  S  T  O  C  K
  D  O  Y  O  U  W  A  N  T  A  N  Y  M  E  X  I  C  O  L  I  M  I  T  E  D
  B  U  Y  B  L  O  C  K  A  T  O  N  E  F  I  F  T  Y  T  O  S  I  X  T  Y
  T  R  Y  R  A  I  L  R  O  A  D  O  N  J  O  N  E  S  O  R  S  M  I  T  H
  W  H  A  T  I  S  T  E  L  E  P  H  O  N  E  S  T  O  C  K  D  O  I  N  G

  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25
           (Plaintext serial numbers, added at bottoms of columns)

  (Appearance of the plaintext serial numbers, if the above columns should
                   be restored to their cryptogram order)
  1 10 20  9 24 19  2 17  6  7 16  5 15 25  8 23 12 13 22 11 21  4 14  3 18


If, then, we hope to decipher cryptograms of other lengths, which
originally were enciphered with exactly the same key as our present
five, it is still necessary that we take one or the other of these
long Myszkowsky-type keys and reduce it to the short columnar form.
The theory on which this is done should not be at all difficult to
understand if it be kept in mind that both of our long keys are
actually the serial numbers of letters, and that each individual
serial number accompanied its letter throughout the encipherment
process. This will explain any references which are made to FIRST and
SECOND encipherment blocks, with their respective columns and rows.
Whichever of the long keys we decide to reduce, our first objective,
always, is that of determining the _length_ of the shorter key; after
that we restore its _order_.

The first process, summed up in Fig. 55, was originally published,
so far as the writer knows, by M. E. Ohaver, and makes use of the
cryptogram numbers which were the first series obtained. The
discovery of the shorter key-length is made by searching the set-up
for some numerical difference (between any two numbers whatever)
which is repeated by corresponding pairs of numbers at some regular
interval. For convenience in making the search, Ohaver suggests that
the mixed cryptogram numbers be written, with uniform spacing, on two
strips of paper, in one case repeated. One strip can then be moved
along beside the other so as to place pairs of numbers in actual
contact. It is immaterial what numerical difference is used; the
difference 1 pointed out in the figure seemed a little more visible
than others. This difference 1 has been noted between the numbers 9
and 10, and the next difference 1 has been found _six positions away_
between the numbers 17 and 18, but is not found again between the
numbers 25 and 6, which stand at the next interval of six positions.
This may be a clue, but it is not what we had hoped to find. The clue
is strengthened, however, by the observation that a difference of 5
occurs just at the right of the original difference 1, and is also
repeated at the lineal interval 6.


                                   Figure 55

  Finding the Original Short Key from the CRYPTOGRAM Serial Numbers - M.E.OHAVER

                            Finding the key-length:

     1  7 24 22 12  9 10 15  4  2 20 17 18 23 13 11  8 25  6  3 21 19 16  5 14.
  1  7 24 22 12  9 10 15  4  2 20 17 18 23 13 11  8 25  6  3 21 19 16  5 14  1  7
                    x  .  .  .  .  .  x                           (Repeat series)

          A difference of 1 occurs again at the interval 6.  The two
          series 9-17 and 10-18 are fragments of columns from the first
          encipherment block.  The key-length necessary for placing
          either pair in a same column is 6.

         Replacing cryptogram numbers in first encipherment block:

         (As PLAINTEXT)...  1   7  24  22  12   9
                           10  15   4   2  20  17
                           18  23  13  11   8  25
                            6   3  21  19  16   5
                           14

  COLUMNS of the FIRST encipherment block are converted to ROWS of the SECOND:

  (a)                           (b)                  (c)
        1 10 18  6 14              1 10 18  6 14 22     1 - 3 - 5 - 2 - 4 - 6
     22 2 11 19/ 7 15 23  3        2 11 19  7 15 23
          12 20  8 16              3 12 20  8 16 24     1  10       6
     24 4 13 21/ 9 17 25  5        4 13 21  9 17 25     2   .       7
                                   5                    3           8
                                                        4           9
                                                        5                
  At (a) the columns of the first block are             (C  O  S  M  O  S)
  arranged so as to make the cryptogram numbers         At (c) the order is
  run consecutively in each of the new columns.         shown in which the columns
  At (b) this block has been adjusted, so as            of (b) would be taken off.
  to form six columns.                                  This order is the KEY.


To find a good clear example, using the strips as they stand, let us
go back toward the left, and look for a difference 2. We find it
first between the numbers 24 and 22; exactly six positions away, we
find it again between the numbers 4 and 2; another six positions, and
we find it between the numbers 13 and 11; still another six positions,
and we find it for the fourth time between the numbers 21 and 19. Thus
we have two series of numbers, 24-4-13-21 and 22-2-11-19, which run
parallel to each other with their numbers always separated by
interval 6. Sequences of this kind came from the _columns of a first
encipherment block_, and can all be placed back in these columns by
re-writing the mixed cryptogram numbers in lines of _six numbers
each_. Sometimes we find such columns broken to bits, as would be the
case should we continue moving the strip until we have completely
exhausted the possibilities for difference 1; and we never find them
complete, since these columns of the first encipherment block were
taken out in irregular order and written continuously upon the rows
of a _second encipherment block_, and after that were sliced through
in the taking out of columns from the second block. We found traces
of them once before, where a difference of 8 was found throughout
four consecutive pairs of numbers 12-20, 9-17, 10-18, 15-23, always
at an interval of 6 positions.

The key-length, then, is 6, and the cryptogram numbers (in their
plaintext order) if written into a block of that width, will
reproduce the first encipherment block. From this, we wish to carry
the numbers, column by column, into their second encipherment block,
from which they may then be taken out, again by columns, in such a
way as to bring them back to their cryptogram order 1-2-3. If this
is to happen, the numbers must run consecutively in the new columns,
and the number 1 must be on the top line. We select, then, from the
restored plaintext block, the column which contains the number 1,
then the column containing the number 2, and so on, writing these
columns horizontally on the rows of the new block, in such an order
as to make the numbers consecutive in every column. This may or may
not require the adjustments indicated in the figure at (a) and (b).
When block (b) is completely adjusted, the order in which it would be
necessary to take its columns so as to produce the cryptogram numbers
in their original 1-2-3 sequence, is the order of the original short
key. Our key-word COSMOS, incidentally, could have been better chosen.

In Ohaver’s process, we have taken the _cryptogram numbers_ and
_enciphered_ them. By the process of General Givierge, summed up in
Fig. 56, we do the opposite: we take the _plaintext numbers_, in
their cryptogram order, and _decipher_ them, so as to bring them back
to their correct plaintext order 1-2-3. For learning the key-length,
General Givierge endeavors to find that number which, when added or
subtracted throughout the series of numbers, will most often cause
one of its segments to repeat another. The portions which repeat are
the columns, or partial columns, not from a first encipherment block,
but from a _second_, since the process here is to follow out a
decipherment. In the figure, the left-hand block (not strictly
necessary) represents the plaintext, written as a cryptogram, and the
one on the right represents it in what is known to have been its
first encipherment block. To develop the second block: either take
columns from the right-hand block and lay them on the rows of the
central one in such an order that its columns can be taken out to
form the cryptogram; or, write the cryptogram arrangement into the
columns of the central block in such an order that its _rows_ will
show the columns of the plaintext block on the right. The order in
which columns must be taken from the right-hand block to form the
central one (or that in which columns must be taken from the central
block to reproduce the cryptogram arrangement) is the order of the
original short key. The condensed presentation here is also drawn
from the writings of M. E. Ohaver. General Givierge, who seems first
to have published the method, was chiefly concerned with exposing the
possibilities of _analysis_, as applied to numbers generally, and
explains to us the reason of the increase 6 which betrays the
key-length in the plaintext series of numbers. The width of the
original block being 6, each number is larger by 6 than the one just
above it, making every one of the columns an arithmetical progression
in which the constant difference is 6. These columns, still retaining
their regular increase of 6, are laid down on the rows of a second
block, and, for at least a portion of their length, some two or more
of them always continue parallel, with progressions of 6 running side
by side. Thus the taking out of columns from the second block will,
at times, select _one each_ from two or more different progressions
of 6, and the new columns, throughout some portion of their length,
will differ from one another by exactly 6, the original key-length.


                                   Figure 56

  Finding the Original Short Key from the PLAINTEXT Serial tumbers - GIVIERGE

       To find the key-length:     Try adding (or subtracting) possible
       key-lengths (4, 5, 6, 7, etc.) to the whole series until some one
       of these added numbers causes portions of the series to repeat.

  1 10 20  9 24 19  2 17  6  7 16  5 15 25  8 23 12 13 22 11 21  4 14  3 18
  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6  6

  7 16 26 15 30 25  8 23 12 13 22 11 21 31 14 29 18 19 28 17 27 10 20  9 24

       The portions which repeat when the correct key-length, 6, is added,
       are columns, or part-columns, from the SECOND encipherment block.

  Plaintext Serial Numbers       S E C O N D                   F I R S T
   In  CRYPTOGRAM  Order:    Encipherment  Block          Enoipherment  Block
       / 1 10 20  9            1  7 13 19 25  4             1  2  3  4  5  6
        24/19  2 17           10 16 22  2  8 14             7  8  9 10 11 12
         6/ 7 16  5           20  5 11 17 23  3            13 14 15 16 17 18
        15/25  8 23            9 15 21  6 12 18            19 20 21 22 23 24
        12/13 22 11           24                           25
        21/ 4 14  3 18

  The ROWS of the CRYPTOGRAM BLOCK, (approximately of column-length), must be
  written back into the COLUMNS of the SECOND ENCIPHERMENT BLOCK in such an
  order that the ROWS  of this SECOND encipherment block could have been taken
  off as a primary cryptogram from the COLUMNS of the FIRST ENCIPHERMENT BLOCK,
  extreme right, known to be the original order of the numbers.

  The original short KEY can then be found by observing (in the central block)
  the order in which columns have been taken from the right-hand block.  That
  is, find the small numbers which were on the top row; these are standing in
  the order 1, 4, 2, 5, 3, 6 (a writing-in key), and the columns which are
  headed by these receive key-numbers in the order 1-3-5-2-4-6.


  * * *

We have seen, then, the general case in which the “enemy” decryptor,
having several cryptograms of the same length, enciphered with the
same key, is able to use a purely mechanical method in order to
restore the plaintext, and afterward, by observing traces of a known
cipher, to extract their key. For the solution of single cryptograms
enciphered in complicated systems, the writer knows of no other method
than straight anagramming, in which the single letters, accompanied
by their serial numbers, are written on individual cardboard squares
(or imagined to be so), and the attempt made to match them up.
Attention has already been called to some possibilities which may lie
in the serial numbers whenever the sequences or probable words are
thought to be correctly matched. But with absolutely nothing known or
suspected as to source or subject matter, and with nothing
discoverable from serial numbers or possible routes (and taking it
for granted that any accumulation of letters represented in about the
normal frequency-proportions can be made to yield dozens of different
solutions), it would hardly seem that the decryptor, even should he
find the correct solution, would have a means of distinguishing it
from any other.


                                   Figure 57

  A Single Cryptogram in Double Columnar Transposition:

  L H D L A  O D D H L  H E E U I  X D F P I  U T A E R  O I T Q A  E T E R L
  N I E N A  U D K L I  E E H Y N  M S J L C  N H P B O  A D G R N.

  The Solution, Enciphered by a Method Mentioned in Chapter III:

  M T Q P I N A I E N E I T H R G E K D U U D L L I R I H F R T E C L O L N J
  L A S H A A U Y D O E E L N E N D H P D H D E A B O.


For the student who may care to struggle with a case of single
anagramming, we have appended a problem in Fig. 57, together with a
means for finding out the solution and perhaps even the key-word. It
has come from the Philadelphia headquarters of a band of
revolutionists, and our stool-pigeon tells us that the leaders of
this movement are to be called together for consultation during the
coming summer.

  * * *

The finding of a _key-word_, after recovery of the numerical key, is
not, of course, necessary to the decipherment of further cryptograms.
However, this recovery will afford us the same convenience which it
gave to the encipherer; that is, a simple mnemonic device for
reproducing the numbers at will. And to recover the actual original
key-word may, at times, provide some insight into the habits or
mental make-up of the person who selected it, and who may select
others like it, or might, conceivably, make use of this same key-word
in some other kind of encipherment. If the key is short, it is
practically always possible to recover more than one word; but with
long keys, we seldom, if ever, recover more than the one word on
which the numbers were actually based. In this connection, however,
it must be remembered that key-words are not necessarily taken from
any one language; thus, their recovery becomes largely a matter of
combined information, intuition, guesses, trials, and determination,
so that an exact method for accomplishing it is hard to give. But,
presuming that key-numbers have been derived in the usual way, those
which are small are, in general, likely to have derived from the
earlier portion of the alphabet, which contains _A_, _E_, _I_. So
long as they increase toward the right, they may continue to represent
a same letter, and when they do, this letter is usually a vowel, When
an increase occurs on the left, the new number has certainly derived
from a new letter, coming later in the alphabet. Whatever the
language, then, it is very easy to determine the two extreme
alphabetical limits outside of which no one of the letters can
possibly be found.

This can be seen at (a) of Fig. 58. The numbers 1, 2, 3, might all
have derived from _A_, but the number 4 cannot have derived from a
letter coming earlier in the alphabet than _B_. Similarly, the
numbers 4, 5, might, by possibility alone, have derived from _B_; the
numbers 6, 7, 8, might all have derived from _C_, the numbers 9, 10,
from _D_, and, finally, the number 11, from no letter earlier than
_E_. When these earliest possible limits have been established for
every key-number, and it is seen that the range is five letters, then
the last five letters of the alphabet, _V_, _W_, _X_, _Y_, _Z_, may
be used to establish the limits at the other end of the alphabet. It
is seen now, that the key-number 6, must have derived from some
letter between _C_ and _X_, inclusive, and similarly with the others.
But when we come to the particular case, it becomes necessary to make
assumptions; for instance, were these numbers derived from a common
English word or from a Russian proper name? The person who selected
it, so far as we know, is accustomed to speaking English, and in all
of his past cryptograms we have been able to recover common English
words rather than proper names. Assuming, then, as at (b) of the same
figure, that we are to recover his usual common English word, we set
down _A_ as a possible letter for the key-numbers 1 and 2. But when
we arrive at the number 3, we see that we cannot assign here a third
_A_, since common English words of this length do not contain a
doubled _A_. The earliest letter possible, then, is _B_, and, upon
noting the consecutive letters _AB_ at this particular point, we
think at once of the common English terminal sequence -_ABLE_.


                                    Figure 58

  (a)  Limits:                         (b)  Assumption of English word:

     6  9  1  4 11  7 10  2  3  8  5        6  9  1  4 11  7 10  2  3  8  5
     C  D  A  B  E  C  D  A  A  C  B              A              A  B  L  E
     X  Y  V  W  Z  X  Y  V  V  X  W       (FL (MY  A  C (NZ (FL (MY  A  B  L  E
                                                   D
                                                   E    (New limits)


To find whether this is possible, we make sure that the new letters,
_L E_, alphabetically considered, do not run contrary to their
supposed numbers, 8 5. Then, having accepted these four letters as
entirely possible and likely, we work back to the missing number, 4,
and find, now, that it has new limits; it must have derived from _E_,
_D_, or _C_, and from nothing else, and of these, we are inclined to
discard _E_, which would give a sequence _AE_. We then work back to
other missing numbers, 6 and 7, and find that these, too, have
acquired new limits; they must be found somewhere between _F_ and
_L_, inclusive. All numbers which follow 8 have attained a new limit
in the earlier portion of the alphabet, but not in the latter portion.
These are all shown in (b). At this point, any knowledge at all of
English prefixes will suggest what the first two letters are and will
narrow the limits still further. The student, perhaps, has already
guessed the word.

Of the keys which follow, (a) and (b) were derived from English words,
one of which has been used in the present chapter. The remaining four
are derived from proper names, respectively (c) German, (d) Italian,
(e) Spanish, and (f) French.

  (a)  1-9-2-4-11-3-7-8-6-10-5.         (b)  2-7-8-3-4-1-6-5-9-10.
  (c)  2-5-11-3-9-13-6-12-8-1-4-7-10.   (d)  9-1-10-6-5-2-8-7-4-3.
  (e)  2-11-3-6-7-9-1-5-8-4-10.         (f)  5-1-4-6-2-3-9-8-7.


36.  By TITOGI.

  (a)   U O Y M E   E T E N A   W H T I M   C I C T I   J I U S O   G N H Y F.
  (b)   Y T M I L   L E M L E   W U A A J   T W O N F   O R T A H   L H T G I.
  (c)   R O P U L   E A E E B   A H F T K   O D T S C   I L T T M   R Y T I H.
  (d)   U M H T S   E U O K S   I H W T R   A N C I O   W A O H T   Y O S S Y.
  (e)   E C E R L   T A D A R   M R E A O   G P O Y M   E E A A T   N I B S A.
  (f)   R E U O T   K N A E H   E H H L Y   W D E L E   E E E O M   N W S L L.
  (g)   I H L P U   H T T G I   Y T T A S   N E R T E   O R Y T A   H N J D S.
  (h)   E S E F K   A C A P E   E O L S A   M E J N S   T E O M S   L E O T I.
  (i)   T E N E W   O H S K I   I N S G T   M O O H T   A A T H U   E U T O B.
  (j)   H T P R A   H L E R E   E R E T A   T L E E H   S T T T E   H B N B S.

37.  By EFSEE.

         (a)    I U E G N   M O W H X   T A N O I   P D I L S   F P I A R -
         (b)    F N E E T   X I E T O   N O T S M   G R T R Y   V G P A C -
         (c)    S F U F N   I C E Q E   S C U N R   I L T M Y   I O I P T -
         (d)    B T E E S   N B I H I   E T L N X   O E S N R   E I E G T.

38.  By SIR ORM.  (This has a keyword!)

T A S H L   E C P W E   T C I H A   O T N R A   O O H L W   D O Y I L   E O H R L
E V A T E   A O M N L   E V N W I   W I E I H   S M H E T   H N W O I   O L S V I
I F S S O   W A S O T   F I L E H   N M G O F   I E R A L   O C G N N.

39.  By DAMONOMAD.  (And he calls this a "Nihilist" !)

A H H S E   S T I H D   I S O M E   A T H I O   O H D I O   U T T I K   M I E S O
F G S N E   R W U G T   S G Y I S   L A T I T   T A A N H   O G E N Y   L A W E A
L E R T M   I W T O E   D.

40.  By FRA-GRANT.  (A military message sent by General Calamity to Major Catastrophe).

T E H A N   E M G S L   L I W S N   E T T A C   K Y E I A   A E B P S   O U R P E
M O C E E   T U N R I   S T E R S   A F O E T   O R T D A   E R T E F   D I N C A
S E R E T   T U O P W   A R U R E   F F O Y A   E E D F O   R D R C R.

     No. 40 can be decrypted by the multiple-anagramming of its units.  Afterward,
     if you are unable to reconstruct the system, No. 41 will tell you all.

41.  By PICCOLA.  (Single block - completed unit - with columns transposed.  The
                   key to this transposition may amuse you, provided you can
                   reconstruct it in letters!)                  

A O U U P   D M C A N   I O G T R   S A A Y N   K N C A B   M N A O A   T L E C H
Q S D O R   E E W W D   N C K E E   S T S H N   I E T E U   H K N I F   D I T Y F
U X G I V   L T A I P   H R C S N   R R E H S   B M E E A   R M T A I   U T E W O
P I R S M   H O O E V   R W F N X   S D A H I   E T S S U   F C N N E   E S N F S
E O O L T   U A E A O   F T V L T   E E O E C.

42.  By TITOGI and PICCOLA.  (General information - nothing more).

      (a)   I H S E W   D O X H D   H T S E O   E H R N E   C T O O A   G A R S A
N O E A O   S O H U W   R T C A U   R E N T T   O M S O C   N Y N P G   S H A P P
N F S N E   R T E H E   P M A W S   M E G I A   E A P O R   Y D T A A   S S A F M
I H S R C   H E C W N   E I T A T   R X E I S   O A C F A   T I C E N   I R T E U
Y H T E R   T S R S E   L S T E G   P A H R W.        (b)   S R H J I   A X E C A
N E Y P K   A N D A T   S D L I L   A S L N T   G E A D Y   E B L Y T   S C C I D
T C S G A   M C E E N   W A T I E   A E N H L   A B D Y A   G H C H E   G I H O I
L P O N P   A S E D N   T T W E S   Y E F I M   L A R E R   H N E D I   O T E L R
O S I T D   S S R I S   N I R R F   S S P E C   T R E I F   B G O M R   X S E N A
H A R N L.        (c)   A E G Y B   A T Y N S   R I D T O   O S D N E   Y E E E O
G N I U U   T W S N L   H E I I S   C G H H W   D R R U W   E A H E T   K C T W V
O E H H I.

43.  By TITOGI.  (Keerful, Si!  All is not gold that glitters).

C T I H N   A I E S O   R M F Y E   E C T H U   W I S L A   E D K R L   B E R N M
J I T S D   A N D O O   H T V A T   H T E R Y   G A U N O   T S A P E   M O E S U
R I L T E   D I E O N   E N R C A   F I N P O   L H O E A   G R B X S.

44.  By ALII KIONA.  (Nou hooda thawt it uvvim?)

E N W N O   T N S E N   Y U H O I   K H N O E   W A O T I   U S S A L   B W S F R
M I E I D   I H R W N   T F N D S   E E O T U   E Y B N O   T W E W Z   E E D I B
A E R Y I   P L R N P   Z R S M U   T A S O I  S U S D T  D T R N H  N O A S A  F E Z.




CHAPTER VIII
Substitution Types

Substitution cipher presupposes the selection of a set of symbols
which can represent the letters or words of messages. As to what
these symbols may be, there is practically no limit; we meet
substitution in our every-day life: the dots and dashes of the Morse
alphabet, the pot-hooks of shorthand, the combinations of Braille,
and so on; and we hear of its use in the sign-language of Indians and
Gipsies, or in the drum-language of the African jungle. These, of
course, are not cipher, yet in each case the plain language has been
replaced with symbols. Considering the use of symbols for cipher
purposes, there are doubtless many among us who played, as children,
with the alphabet of the “Masonic” cipher, based upon a design like
the one used for ticktacktoe. Lord Bacon’s alphabet has already been
mentioned. The use of printers’ symbols, and similar characters, can
be seen in the works of Edgar Allan Poe. Charles I of England is said
to have used a cipher alphabet in which letters were represented by a
series of dots, placed in certain positions with reference to the
line of writing. An endless number of queer symbols is met with in
fiction, such as the use of the little dancing men by Sir Arthur
Conan Doyle. Cipher alphabets of the nature mentioned do not produce
ciphers in any way different from those produced by substitution with
letters and numbers; as a matter of fact, the decryptor who must deal
with a cryptogram made up of arbitrary signs usually begins the work
by making a substitution of his own, replacing each unfamiliar symbol
with some one letter (or number). We will confine our discussion,
then, to those characters which are transmissible by Morse.

  * * *

Substitution ciphers may be classified under four major types, each
having its subdivisions and variations, and its intercombinations
with other types:

1. _Simple substitution_ (also called _monoalphabetic substitution_)
makes use of only one cipher alphabet.

2. _Multiple-alphabet substitution_ (also called _double-key
substitution_, _polyalphabetic substitution_, etc.) makes use of
several different cipher alphabets according to some agreed plan.

The term “multisubstitutional” is sometimes applied to the
multiple-alphabet cipher, but more correctly refers to a certain form
of the simple substitution cipher, in which the single alphabet is so
designed as to provide optional substitutes for all or part of the
letters.

3. _Polygram substitution_ provides a scheme by means of which groups
of letters are replaced integrally with other groups, which may be of
letters or of numbers.

4. _Fractional substitution_, which requires a certain type of cipher
alphabet, breaks up the substitutes for single letters, and subjects
these fractions to further encipherment. More often than not, the
result is a combination cipher, rather than a purely substitutional
one.




CHAPTER IX
Simple Substitution — Fundamentals

Simple substitution is ordinarily defined as a cipher in which each
letter of the alphabet has one fixed substitute, and each
cryptogram-symbol represents one fixed original. When this cipher is
used for puzzle purposes, as we find it in our newspapers and popular
magazines, the substitutes (which are invariably letters of the
alphabet) may be chosen at random, and the cryptograms must follow
certain arbitrary rulings which are designed to make them “fair”:
Word-divisions and punctuation must follow religiously those of the
original text; a certain minimum of length must be provided; no
letter may act as its own substitute; foreign words are not
permissible; and so on. Aside from the observance of such rules,
however, no holds are barred; the constructor of such a cryptogram,
totally unconcerned with the meaning of his plaintext (except that it
must have one), sometimes gives his chief attention to distorting the
normal language characteristics in an effort to baffle the analyst,
and often will carefully search his dictionary for words like
_yclept_, _crwth_, _syzygy_, _pterodactyl_, _ichthyomancy_, not
infrequently producing a plaintext which is almost as incomprehensible
as its corresponding cryptogram. Our study here will be confined to
the simple substitution cipher as applied to normal English text.

When a substitution key (a pair of alphabets) is being used for
cipher purposes, the letters which make up the cipher alphabet cannot
be chosen at random; the key must be of such a nature that any one of
the several correspondents, desiring to make use of it, will have it
at his disposal. Word-divisions are usually concealed, or,
occasionally, falsified. Punctuation, if used at all, must don the
apparel worn by the rest of the text; no limitations can be placed on
length, and no word whatever can be barred, where the intention is
that of conveying actual messages; and it is not at all uncommon to
find that one or more letters are serving as their own substitutes.

In discussing keys, we will make some arbitrary rulings of our own,
but only in the interests of clarity. We will assume, for all cases,
that the two necessary alphabets are always written horizontally, as
several are shown in Fig. 59; that wherever the two complete alphabets
appear, the upper of the pair is always the one in which plaintext
letters must be found, so that the lower one is always the cipher
alphabet. Thus, whenever the two alphabets are written out in full,
the substitute for any given plaintext letter will be the letter
standing immediately below it; and the original of any cipher letter
will be the letter standing just above it. Wherever it seems advisable
to show a distinction, the cipher letters will be expressed as
capitals and the plaintext letters will appear in lower case.

Among the oldest cipher alphabets ever used for practical purposes
are those of the type called “Caesar,” one such alphabet having been
used by Julius Caesar, and another by Octavius. As may be seen at (a)
of Fig. 59, this type of cipher alphabet is no more than a simple
_shifting_ of the normal alphabet to a new point of beginning. Using
this particular example, the word “Caesar” will be enciphered as
_F D H V D U_; or, if the word _R Y H U_ is found in a cryptogram, it
deciphers as “over.”

At (b) of the same figure, we have a pair of _inverse_ normal
alphabets. Here, it is not necessary to specify that one of the pair
is a plaintext alphabet and the other a cipher alphabet; whenever a
plaintext alphabet is merely reversed and allowed to serve as its own
cipher alphabet, the encipherment becomes _reciprocal_; that is,
whenever _Z_ is the substitute for _A_, then _A_ will also be the
substitute for _Z_, and so for other letters. Thus, we need not write
down more than half of the key shown at (b); and, in any other case
of reciprocal alphabets, only enough of it to make sure that we have
all 26 of the letters; after that, we may find them where we please,
both for encipherment and for decipherment. Simple reciprocal
alphabets are also ancient. The one just mentioned, and also the one
shown at (c), are both said to have been used in parts of the Bible.
The two inverse alphabets of (b) may, of course, be _shifted_ with
reference to each other; that is, one or the other may be caused to
begin at any desired letter, just as is done with the ordinary
alphabet in deriving one of the “Caesars.” It is also possible, as
indicated at (d), to divide the normal alphabet into its two halves,
and shift one of the halves; in this case the encipherment would be
reciprocal whether or not the shifted portion runs in reverse order.
At (e) and (f), we have mixed (or interverted) alphabets which,
though crude, are more in line with modern practice than those which
precede them, since both of these are based on the key-word CULPEPER.


                                  Figure 59

                       Some Simple Substitution Keys
  (a)                                                                    
  A shifted, or "Caeser," alphabet:

         Plaintext:   a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
         CIPHER:      D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C
  (b)                                                                    
  A pair of inverse alphabets:

              A B C D E F G H I J K L N N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
              Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B A

  Other examples of the RECIPROCAL alphabet:

    (c)  A B C D E F G H I J K L M      (e)  C U L P E R A B D F G H I
         N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z           Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J

    (d)  A B C D E F G H I J K L M      (f)  C U L P E R A B D F G H I
         T S R Q P O N Z Y X W V U           J K M N O Q S T V W X Y Z


The usual plan for deriving cipher alphabets from key-words is as
follows: First, all repeated occurrences of any same letter, such as
the second _P_ and the second _E_ of the word CULPEPER, are discarded.
The unrepeated letters of the key-word, as _C U L P E R_, are placed
at the beginning of the cipher alphabet, and the rest of the 26
letters are made to follow these, usually in their normal alphabetical
order. If an adequate key-word be chosen, for instance the word
UNCOPYRIGHTABLE, a well-mixed alphabet results; but, in order to have
a cipher alphabet which is truly incoherent, and hard for the
decryptor to reconstruct, we may write this already-mixed alphabet
into block form and subject it to a transposition of some kind.
Several examples of this may be examined in Fig. 60. In example (a),
the repeated letters of the key-word have merely been discarded,
while example (b) retains these two positions in order to produce
more and shorter columns, with three different lengths. In both cases,
the columns of the block have been taken out by descending verticals
to form cipher alphabets (a) and (b), but the transposition may
follow any desired route or other process. Example (c) suggests
further uses for key-words. Still another process (not shown)
consists in writing the key-numbers above a block, exactly as in
example (c), and allowing them to govern the _lengths of rows_. In
the writing-in of the alphabet, normal or mixed, the first row of
letters is made to end under key-number 1, the second row under
key-number 2, and so on, so that the completed block contains rows of
different lengths; it may then be taken off by columns, or otherwise.
Numerous other devices exist, but it should be plain from the
foregoing that we have an unlimited field in which to derive
well-scrambled cipher alphabets, so that there is no need whatever
for forming one at random and later being unable to set it up again.


                                  Figure 60

               Some Methods for Forming a Keyword-Mixed Alphabet

                              Keyword:  CULPEPER

  (a)                        (b)*                        (c)
     C U L P E R                C U L P E * * R             C U L P E P E R
     A B D F G H                A B D F G H I J             1 8 4 5 2 6 3 7
     I J K M N O                K M N O Q S T V             A B C D E F G H
     Q S T V W X                W X Y Z                     I J K L M N O P
     Y Z                                                    Q R S T U V W X
                           *)(An OHAVER Method).            Y Z

  (a)
        Plaintext:  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
        CIPHER:     C A I Q Y U B J S Z L D K T P F M V E G N W R H O X

  (b)   Plaintext:  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
        CIPHER:     C A K W U B M X L D N Y P F O Z E G Q H S I T R J V

  (c)   Plaintext:  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
        CIPHER:     A I Q Y E M U G O W C K S D L T F N V H P X B J R Z


For the _encipherment_ of substitution cryptograms, the plaintext is
first written out in full with enough space between its lines to allow
for the later insertion of cryptogram-letters. The correct substitute
for each letter is then written below it, after which, these
substitutes are nearly always marked off into five-letter groups, and
the groups are taken off on another sheet to form the finished
cryptogram. It is sometimes recommended that plaintext and cipher
letters be written in two different colors, so as to avoid any risk
of taking off portions of plaintext along with a cryptogram.


            Figure 61

  "Running Down the Alphabet"

  Cryptogram: Y B P R O B Q L...
              Z C Q S P C R M...
              A D R T Q D S N...
  Plaintext:  B E S U R E T O...


For _decipherment_, the plan is the same, except that the cryptogram
is written first, and the two alphabets of the key exchange their
functions. Often, when the cipher alphabet in use is so incoherent
that its letters are not quickly found, the decipherer will prepare
for himself a special _decipherment key_, in which he places the
letters of his cipher alphabet in straight alphabetical order, and
allows the plaintext alphabet to grow mixed.

In taking up the _decryptment_ of simple substitution, we may dispose
summarily of the Caesar alphabets by pointing to Fig. 61. If we
suspect that one of these has been used, we may verify the suspicion
by taking some ten-or-fifteen-letter segment of the cryptogram, and,
with each of its letters as a beginning, extend the ten or fifteen
alphabets, a few letters at a time, until we come to the line which
is purely plaintext. This process is popularly known as “running down
the alphabet,” and whenever it results in a row of plaintext, we may
quickly determine the amount of “shift,” set up the cipher alphabet,
and start deciphering.

The same thing is true of a pair of _inverse normal alphabets_ which
have merely been _shifted with reference to each other_. But in this
case, the cryptogram (or that segment of it which is being
investigated), _must first be enciphered in the same kind of
alphabet_. To explain this, suppose that our cryptogram fragment is
_B Y K I L Y J O_. If we encipher this with the pair of inverse
alphabets which was shown at (b) of Fig. 59, we obtain a new
cryptogram fragment _Y B P R O B Q L_. This new fragment is now a
“Caesar,” and we may “run it down the alphabet” until we find its
plaintext. This particular fragment was done with a pair of inverse
normal alphabets in which the lower one began at _C_, instead of at
_Z_. Most decryptors, in dealing with any kind of substitution, will
make these two tests before trying anything else. When the guess
proves correct, a great deal of paper work can be saved.

Concerning decryptment in the case of the less simple alphabets, the
true vulnerability of simple substitution can be seen when the word
“battalion,” enciphered in alphabet (f) of our Fig. 59, becomes
_T S B B S M Z E P_. Since each letter of the alphabet may have only
one substitute, the pattern of -_atta_- shows up clearly in its
enciphered version -_SBBS_-. The decryptor knows instantly what kind
of pattern it represents, since the letters _S_ and _B_ can have only
one original each. The frequency with which these two letters have
been used in his cryptogram will tell him approximately what their
two originals ought to be, and, by making a few trials, he loses
little time in arriving at a solution. As a matter of fact, a simple
monoliteral substitution, given fewer than a hundred letters of text
and no information whatever as to source or subject-matter, can be
decrypted purely through the frequencies and other characteristics of
its letters; and if, in addition, the original word-divisions have
been preserved, we have the lengths and patterns of these words, plus
the knowledge that individual letters have their favorite positions
in words.

  * * *

_The “Crypt” with word-divisions_. — Not infrequently, the cryptogram
which retains its word-divisions can be read at sight, without putting
pencil to paper, and this regardless of how short it may be. Again,
even though based on normal text, it will prove more troublesome; and
thus, in dealing with this type of simple substitution, we attack each
individual example according to what appears at first glance to be its
greatest weakness. The cryptogram shown in Fig. 62, for instance,
would be attacked through its many _short words_, probably the
simplest of the available methods. The words in question are those
numbered 3 (_RD_), 4 (_MD_), 9 (_QYR_), 11 (_RKV_), 13 (_DF_), and 15
(_DN_). Among the two-letter words, it is noticeable that every one of
these includes a letter _D_, used indiscriminately as the initial or
final letter. We do not need to know much of cryptanalysis to guess
that this letter represents the _o_ found in such words as _to_, _no_,
_do_, _go_, _of_, _on_, _or_. A comparison of the two three-letter
words shows that these, also, have a common letter, _R_, which ends
one of these words and begins the other. Of all words in English, the
commonest is _the_. If _RKV_ be assumed as _the_, then _RD_, already
thought to contain _o_, will check as _to_, another extremely common
word.

Thus we are able to begin work by _tentatively assuming_ that the
four cryptogram letters _R_, _K_, _V_, and _D_, are the substitutes,
respectively, for plaintext letters _t_, _h_, _e_, and _o_. These
assumptions are tested by actually making the necessary substitutions
directly on the cryptogram, as seen at (a) of Fig. 62. And we may be
sure that they are correct when we see the 12th word clearly outlined
as _other_. This word gives a new substitution: cipher letter _T_
evidently represents _r_, occurring in three different words; the
actual making of this substitution will cause the 8th word to show a
very common ending: -_tter_.

If we now consider the other three-letter word, the 9th of the
cryptogram, we see that _QYR_ cannot represent any one of the common
words _not_, _got_, _out_, _yet_, since the substitutes for _o_ and
_e_ have already been determined. It may, however, represent the
common word _but_, especially if we care to investigate the frequency
in the cryptogram of its first letter, _Q_. This letter has been used
only once; and its assumed original, _b_, is normally of very low
frequency, and, in addition, is known to have a fondness for initial
positions. The assumption of this word as _but_ gives us the
substitute for _u_, which appears to be _Y_.


                                   Figure 62

                             Making Substitutions

  (a)          1           2     3     4           5         6               7
     F D R J N U   H V X X U   R D   M D   S K V S O   P J R K   Z D Y F Z J X
       o t           e         t o     o     h e           t h     o

               8       9                 10      11          12    13
     G S R R V T   Q Y R   W D A R W D F V   R K V   D R K V T   D F
         t t e         t     o   t   o   e   t h e   o t h e     o

                 14    15              16            17
     S Z Z D Y F R   D N   N V O V T S X   S A W V Z R.
           o     t   o       e   e               e   t


  (b)    ...D F    S Z Z D Y F R    D N...           ...Z D Y F Z J X...
            o n    a c c o u n t    o f                 c o u n c . .
            13          14           15                     7


In addition to the points mentioned, it is not unusual to find that
short words, by their very positions with reference to some longer
word, will identify a whole sequence, as might happen with the
sequence shown at (b) of the same figure. Good examples of this are:
_as well as_, _as soon as_, _in order to_, and so on. In this
particular case of (b), we began with only the identified _o_, and
immediately were able to identify _t_; this alone should serve for
spotting the whole sequence _on account of_, taking into consideration
the doubled _c_. Notice what the identification of the word _account_
will do toward identifying the 7th word.

Among methods which do not seem indicated in the given example, there
is a very fertile field for research in the examination of _terminal
sequences_. When two or more of the affixes -_tion_, -_ing_, _in_-,
and _con_- are present in the same text, as they practically always
are, they will serve to identify one another, and may, in addition,
be cross-compared with many of the short words, as in, _on_, _no_,
_not_, _into_, _upon_, _can_. The prefix _sub_- may serve to identify
the word _but_. There is a whole group -_ment_, -_ence_, -_ance_,
-_ency_, -_ancy_; another group _pre_-, _re_-, -_er_, _de_-, -_ed_,
etc.; or a good comparison in _be_-, -_able_, -_ible_, etc.

Still a third road to solution, especially popular with those who
solve the “aristocrats,” is found in _pattern words_, that is, words
having one or more letters repeated. The puzzler, examining a
dictionary, prepares lists for his permanent use, one list for each
“pattern”; such a list, for instance, would contain PATTERN, FALLING
and all other words in which the third and fourth letters are the
same and all others different, another would contain all words having
the pattern STATE, DEFER, ROBOT, still another all words of the
pattern BANANA, ROCOCO, and so on. The solver, having thus armed
himself in advance, begins work by searching his cryptogram for words
having repeated cipher letters, and attempts to identify these from
the proper lists. He may provide himself, also, with non-pattern
lists, on which words have given lengths but contain no repeated
letters; and with “transposal lists” containing pairs of words (as
NIGHT and THING) which use the same letters but not in the same order.
It is true that such lists are troublesome to prepare, but they are
extremely effective; they will break the most resistant of the
“aristocrats” or the shortest example of legitimate cipher.

No matter how resistant the cryptogram, all that is really needed is
an _entry_, the identification of one word, or of three or four
letters. The experienced solver knows well that persistence will find
this entry, and trusts largely to instinct and perseverance; the
beginner, however, may feel at a loss for a “system,” and, if so,
may, perhaps, be able to find suggestions for one in the next few
paragraphs.


              Figure 63

  A Favorite Form of Frequency Count
      Combined With CONTACT Data

      A   D S                    2/4
          R W                    
      B

      C

      D   F R M Z W W V T Z R   10/11
          R M S Y A F R F Y N    
      E

      F   * Y D D Y              5/6
          D Z V S R              
      G   X                      1/2
          S                      
       (Etc.)

  Concerning the numbers:  A has a
  frequency of 2, and a variety-count
  of 4.  D has a frequency of 10, and
  a variety-count of only 11.  (Yet
  D, with so little variety of contact
  is a vowel!)


First of all, in any substitution problem, there should be a counting
of the letters in the cryptogram in order to find out their
frequencies. This is called a _frequency count_, and is usually
accomplished as follows: The decryptor first lays out the normal
alphabet — either horizontally or vertically. He then begins with the
first letter of his cryptogram, taking letters one by one just as he
finds them, and for each time that he finds a letter in his
cryptogram, he places a tally mark beside that same letter as found
in his prepared alphabet. The result of such a count, taken on the
foregoing cryptogram, will be shown further on, when the same
cryptogram appears again without its word-divisions.

If the problem seems likely to prove really difficult, there should
also be a _contact count_; that is, a list showing every letter,
together with the two which have flanked it right and left each time
it was used. Such a count is partly shown in Fig. 63. This, like the
frequency count, may be prepared either vertically or horizontally;
and, just as in making ready for the frequency count, an alphabet may
be laid out in advance ready to receive the contact letters, taken
from the cryptogram as they happen to be found. Specifically: The
letter _F_ comes first in the cryptogram; it has no left-hand contact,
but is contacted on the right by _D_. We find the _F_ of the prepared
alphabet, and place beside it its contacts: *-_D_. The second letter
of the cryptogram is _D_, flanked by _F_ and _R_. We find the _D_ of
the prepared alphabet, and place beside it its contacts: _F_-_R_; and
so on to the end of the cryptogram. Some solvers do not prepare an
alphabet in advance, but simply put down the main letters as they
happen to come across them in the cryptogram. It should be added,
too, that the few contacts included in Fig. 63 were taken from the
_undivided_ cryptogram. When word-divisions exist, and are known to
be the correct ones, a great many solvers do not include any contacts
which involve two different words. Here, for instance, the second
appearance of _D_ is shown with contacts _R_-_M_. These solvers,
knowing that this _D_ stands at the end of a word, will leave the
_M_-contact blank: _R_-*

It will be noticed from the figure that the contact-count is, in
itself, a frequency count; it shows that _A_ has been used twice
(frequency 2), that _B_ and _C_ have not been used at all, that _D_
has a frequency of 10, and so on. We may also make it a
_variety-count_, by noting down beside each letter the number of
_different_ letters present among its contacts. Ordinarily, the
vowels have more variety in their contacts than do the consonants,
and take part in more reversals. The uses of contact data will be
examined more closely later on.

Now, giving our attention to English frequencies: No matter what
frequency table we examine, we always find that the letter _E_ tops
the list, with a frequency of over 12%. Except in telegraphic text,
the letter _T_ always has the second frequency, near 10%. After that,
the frequency tables will disagree as to whether _A_ or _O_ should
have the third frequency, or whether _I_ should come before _N_, or
_S_ before _R_; but always the same nine letters, _E T A O N I R S H_,
will constitute the _high-frequency group_ of letters. These
particular letters will make up about 70% of any English text, and it
is almost impossible to prepare one, no matter how short, without
using them in about that proportion, though in the shorter texts, _L_
and _D_ will sometimes creep up into the high-frequency class, taking
the place of _H_. Following the high-frequency group, we find a group
of letters which are always of _moderate frequency_; and a third group
made up of _low-frequency_ letters. Since the frequency tables
themselves are not duplicates throughout, we could not expect, even
having a 10,000-letter cryptogram, to make substitutions by simply
following the frequency table and be absolutely sure of coming out
with the correct solution, though we might very nearly do so, and
might, to some extent, succeed in doing this with a cryptogram of
2,000 letters. The “aristocrats,” however, are arbitrarily confined
to lengths which run between 75 and 100 letters. Even without
manipulation, a text of this length will not always show _E_ as a
frequent letter, and may, for some reason, show _Z_ or _X_ with a
fairly high frequency.

However, the “class distinctions” among the letters are always, to
some extent, dependable. High-frequency letters, moderate-frequency
letters, and low-frequency letters, all tend to be very exclusive.
They will exchange frequencies with letters of their own class, but
all three classes are disinclined to welcome outsiders. The vowels,
also, as we have seen, have their fraternity; if the frequency of _E_
is lowered, some other vowel, even _U_ and _Y_, will insist upon
making up the difference, rather than yield this privilege to a
consonant.

The high-frequency group, as mentioned, includes the nine letters
_E T A O N I R S H_. Even in this exclusive circle, there are cliques
— not ironclad, but clearly noticeable:

_Class I_. The letters _T O S_ appear frequently _both as initial
letters and as final letters_ in their own words, with terminal _O_
confined largely to short words. All three of these are very freely
doubled.

_Class II_. The letters _A I H_ appear frequently as _initial
letters_, but far less frequently as finals, especially _A I_. Not
one of these is readily doubled.

Class III_. The letters _E N R_ appear frequently as _final letters_,
but far less frequently as initials. The letter _E_ is very freely
doubled; the other two not so often.

The following further observation might be made: When one of these
letters changes its class, the least likely exchange is one occurring
between classes II and III.

  * * *

Now let us return to the foregoing cryptogram and consider the
application of this information. A frequency count taken on this
cryptogram will show that when its letters are rearranged according
to their frequencies, they divide automatically into three rather
clearly-defined groups, much like those of the normal frequency table.
There are eight letters which outrank the rest, and these, named in
the order of decreasing frequencies, are: _R_, _D_, _V_, _S_, _F_,
_Z_, _K_, _X_. Presumably, then, most of these are substitutes for
letters of the class _E T A O N I R S H_.

If an examination now be made of the terminal letters in the
cryptogram, it will be found that, of the eight considered, the
letters _R D F_ have appeared at least once in both positions. These
we may label class (a), as being good material for the originals _t_,
_o_, _s_. It is found that the letters _S Z_ have appeared at least
once as initials, but not at all as finals. These we may label class
(b), that is, good material for the originals _a_, _i_, _h_, except
for a point which will be mentioned in a moment. The remaining three
letters, _V K X_ are found at least once as finals, but not at all as
initials; these we will call class (c), good material for the
originals _e_, _n_, _r_. Thus, we are enabled to begin our work by
noting down the following possibilities:
 
  (a) _R D F_ might represent (I)   — _T O S_. (Compare the facts: _t_, _o_, _n_).
  (b) _S Z_   might represent (II)  — _A I H_. (Compare the facts: _a_, _c_).
  (c) _V K X_ might represent (III) — _E N R_. (Compare the facts: _e_, _h_, _l_).

While such a classification is probably never 100% accurate, the
writer has still to find a cryptogram (unless among the very badly
manipulated “aristocrats”) in which at least part of the assumptions
are not correct. We are dealing, however, with the _very short
cryptogram_, in which a single occurrence of a letter in a given
position can be regarded as of some importance.

Ordinarily, the most frequent letter of (c) will represent _e_, as it
does here. This letter is famous as a final letter, and any printed
page will show it at the end of 17 or 18 words in every hundred.
There is not so clear a distinction between _T_ and _S_ of class I.

The most vulnerable of the groups, however, is (b). Of the three
letters which may be represented here, two are vowels, concerning
which we are to hear more, and not one is readily doubled. When _Z_,
tentatively included in this group, is found to have been doubled
near the beginning of a word, it is seen to be wrongly classified.

This method, as mentioned, is intended merely as a suggested means
for effecting an entry. The correct identification of only four
letters, as we have seen, will make enormous inroads into the
contents of a cryptogram.

Other points which will at times prove helpful are as follows: In
words of three and five letters, the central one is nearly always a
vowel, taking it for granted that the words _the_ and _and_ will
never be present in any difficult cryptogram. In the longer words,
the favorite positions of the vowels are the two positions which
follow the initial letter and the two positions which precede the
final letter. The favorite position of _I_, in fact, is well known as
the third-to-last. About half the words used in any written text are
of the type called _negative_, or _empty_; that is, the pronouns and
auxiliary verbs, and particularly the various kinds of connectives
_without which_ _no sentence can be put together_. If your cryptogram
is an “aristocrat,” you will probably find that most of your
prepositions begin with _A_: _amongst_, _amidst_, _adown_, etc. Every
sentence contains a verb, and these are more or less limited in their
possible terminations. Any letter used only two or three times, and
always followed by the same letter, is good material for _Q_. With
what has been said, the student should have no trouble in dealing
with the first fifteen “aristocrats” which follow the next chapter.
As to the remaining thirty-five of Mr. Lamb’s collection, we need say
only this: It is impossible to avoid every characteristic of the
English language and still write English.

  * * *

_The General Case_. — Now let us examine carefully Fig. 64, where the
foregoing cryptogram is repeated without its word-separations, and is
followed by its frequency and contact data. The various devices
indicated in this figure are all of a more or less optional nature.
Concerning the preparation of the cryptogram itself, the chief
requirement is that it be done in ink, or typewritten, on paper which
will suffer a great deal of erasure. The placing of its frequency
figure above each letter is highly recommended, but not vital. Many
solvers will underscore all possible repeated sequences, and will
indicate in some other manner all reversals of digrams; others will
underscore only the repeated trigrams and longer sequences; and still
others do not underscore at all, being content to have all of these
repetitions and reversals listed before them in the contact data.


                                    Figure 64

   5 10 11  3  3  2  1  9  4  4  2 11 10  1 10  6  4  9  6  2  1  3 10  4
   F  D  R  J  N  U  H  V  X  X  U  R  D  M  D  S  K  V  S  O  P  J  R  K

   5 10  3  5  5  3  4  1  6 11 11  9  3  1  3 11  3 10  2 11  3 10  5  9
   Z  D  Y  F  Z  J  X  G  S  R  R  V  T  Q  Y  R  W  D  A  R  W  D  F  V

  11  4  9 10 11  4  9  3 10  5  6  5  5 10  3  5 11 10  3  3  9  2  9  3
   R  K  V  D  R  K  V  T  D  F  S  Z  Z  D  Y  F  R  D  N  N  V  O  V  T

   6  4  6  2  3  9  5 11
   S  X  S  A  W  V  Z  R

   Ordinary Frequency Count:

  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z
  2       10     5  1  1     3  4     1  3  2  1  1 11  6  3  2  9  3  4  3  5

                              Contact-Information:

   (High-frequency symbols)

    R       D       V       S       F       Z       K       X

   D.J     F.R     H.X     D.K     ..D     K.D     S.V     V.X
   U.D     R.M     K.S     V.O     Y.Z     F.J     R.Z     X.U
   J.K     M.S     R.T     G.R     D.V     S.Z     R.V*    J.G
   S.R     Z.Y*    F.R     F.Z     D.S     Z.D     R.V*    S.S
   R.V     W.A     K.D     T.X     Y.R     V.R
   Y.W     W.F     K.T     X.A
   A.W     V.R     N.O
   V.K     T.F     O.T     (Low-frequency symbols)
   D.K     Z.Y*    W.Z
   F.D     R.N              G       H       M       P       Q
   Z..                     X.S     U.V     D.D     O.J     T.Y

   (Moderate-frequency symbols)

    J       N       T       W       Y       A       O       U
   R.N     J.U     V.Q     R.D*    D.F*    D.R     S.P     N.H
   P.R     D.N     V.D     R.D*    Q.R     S.W     V.V     X.R
   Z.X     N.V     V.S     A.V     D.F*


As to the preparation of the contact data, most of the expert
decryptors seem to prefer the vertical arrangement of Fig. 63 to the
one shown here. But, in simple substitution, a full listing, made for
all letters, is not necessary in dealing with the average cryptogram.
Usually, it will serve the purpose to make a frequency count first,
and then prepare a listing of contacts which includes only chosen
letters, those of very high frequency and those of very low frequency;
with many cryptograms, no listing at all need be prepared. The contact
data, however, are valuable. Each pair of contact-letters actually
indicates a trigram. Examining, for instance, the listing under _R_:
The first expression, _D.J_, represents a trigram _DRJ_ in which the
central letter was omitted in order to conserve time and space. When
we find, lower down in the same listing, another letter _D_, we see
in this a repeated digram _DR_. Considering the right-hand side of
the same listing: When we find _K_ used three times, we see this as a
digram _RK_ used three times. _By finding its duplication, under K_
(left side), we are able to see that two of these repetitions are
continued as parts of a repeated trigram _RKV_. In the list of
contacts for _D_, we find a repeated trigram _ZDY_, which may be
traced, under _Y_, as part of a longer repeated sequence, _ZDYF_. It
is usually best to underscore these longer repeated sequences on the
cryptogram; often, they can be identified from the list of frequent
trigrams. But repeated digrams, as a rule, are so numerous as to be
in the way when noted on the cryptogram itself. With digrams, only
those which are repeated oftenest need be underscored; they can
nearly always be identified directly from the list of frequent
digrams. The solver, then, prepares his cryptogram and sequence data
to suit himself, varying his method according to the difficulty of
the given example. With this done, his usual method of solution
follows the process popularly known as “vowel-spotting.”

  * * *

_The Vowel-Solution Method_. — Using this process, the first step is
that of separating the vowels from the consonants; the second is that
of assigning identities to the selected vowels, and afterward to the
most recognizable of the consonants.

For assistance in applying this method, suppose we extract certain
information from the digram chart and have this concretely before us
in a series of numbered “pointers”:

1. The vowels _A E I O_ are normally found in the high-frequency
section of the frequency count; the vowel _U_ in the section of
moderate frequencies, and the vowel _Y_ in the low-frequency section.

2. Letters contacting low-frequency letters are usually vowels.

3. Letters showing a wide variety in their contact-letters are
usually vowels.

4. In repeated digrams, one letter is usually a vowel.

5. In reversed digrams, one letter is usually a vowel.

6. Doubled consonants are usually flanked by vowels, and vice versa.

7. It is unusual to find more than five consonants in succession.

8. Vowels do not often contact one another. If the letter of highest
frequency can be assumed as _E_, any other high-frequency letter
which never touches _E_ at all is practically sure to be another
vowel, and one which contacts it very often cannot be a vowel. (This
will apply equally to other vowels, wrongly assumed as _E_.)

With a text of reasonable length, say 150 letters, it is sometimes
possible to determine with certainty just which of the
cryptogram-letters represent the six vowels; with shorter cryptograms,
we can usually find four; sometimes only three. But once the
separation has been made, individual vowels can usually be established
as follows:

The most frequent one is ordinarily _E_. The one which never touches
it is most likely to be _O_. Both of these are very freely doubled,
and for that reason are often confused with each other, but seldom
with any other vowel. They rarely touch each other.

The vowel which follows _E_ and almost never precedes it, is _A_.

The vowel which reverses with it is _I_.

The same two observations will apply to the vowel _O_; but a
distinction occurs when the vowel _U_ can be found; this vowel
precedes _E_ and follows _O_.

The only vowel-vowel digrams of any real frequency are _OU_, _EA_,
_IO_.

Three vowels found in succession may represent _IOU_, _EOU_, _UOU_,
_EAU_.

As to identification of the consonants: Those letters still remaining
in the high-frequency section of the frequency count will usually
include _T N R S H_. Of these, the most easily identified is _H_,
which precedes all vowels and seldom follows one; it may be identified
often as part of repeated sequences _TH_, _HE_, _HA_.

Next to _H_, the most recognizable of the consonants, aside from
frequency, is probably _R_, which reverses freely and indiscriminately
with all vowels, and has a strong affinity for other high-frequency
letters.

The consonant _T_ can usually be identified by its frequency, by its
tendency to precede vowels rather than follow them, and by its almost
inevitable combination with _H_ on more than one occasion. It is also
notably difficult to distinguish from the vowels.

The letter _N_ has characteristics which are to some extent the
opposite of those mentioned for _H_; it prefers to follow vowels and
precede consonants, and, to a lesser extent, the same is true of _S_,
according to some charts. However, _N_, _S_, and _T_ are all readily
reversible with vowels, and are sometimes hard to tell apart.

The only frequent reversals of two consonants are _ST_-_TS_ and
_RT_-_TR_.

The doubles _TT_ and _SS_ are among the most frequent in the language.

Having this information, together with what we know of frequent
digrams and frequent trigrams and very common short words, we are
well armed against the longer cryptograms. Those which are shorter
will give more trouble; but it takes a very short cryptogram indeed
to be really resistant.

Our foregoing cryptogram contains only 80 letters.


              Figure 65

      (Cryptogram Frequencies:)
   R  D  V      S  F  Z      K  X
  11 10  9      6  5  5      4  4
    E  T        A  O  N   I  R  S  H
          (Normal Grouping)


To apply “pointers” in this case, let us begin by considering the
individual frequencies of the letters _E T A O N I R S H_. Their
frequencies per 100, according to our own chart, are about as follows:
_E_, 12; _T_, 10; _A_, 8; _O_, 8; _N_, 7; _I_, 7; _R_, 6; _S_, 7; _H_,
5. Thus, when frequency alone is considered, _E_ and _T_ have a
tendency to draw away from the others and form a private
high-frequency group of their own. The distinction among the others
is not so clear, and not always the same in all tables; we can only
say of these that _A_ and _O_ will always outrank the rest, and will
be closely followed by one of the others, usually _N_, and that _H_
will always rank last.

Thus, the high-frequency group itself tends to sub-divide more or
less clearly into three minor groupings: _E T_ — _A O N_ — _I R S H_.
Of these, the first minor group shows one vowel, the second shows two,
and the third shows one; the vowels _U_ and _Y_ are not present.

Now if the eight leading letters of our cryptogram, already listed as
_R D V S F Z K X_, be examined in this respect, it is found that
these, also, have a tendency toward separation into groups of
differing frequency, which more or less correspond to the normal
groupings, as indicated roughly in Fig. 65.

Normally, we expect the highest of these subdivisions to contain one
vowel and one consonant, specifically _E_ and _T_. When we find that
the corresponding subdivision of the cryptogram contains three
letters, the supposition is that one of the vowels, _O_ or _A_, has
moved up into this section; in that case, it has taken part of the
frequency of _E_, making it not at all unlikely that the most
frequent letter of the cryptogram will not represent _E_, and will
not, in fact, represent a vowel. And if, as we believe, there are two
vowels in the highest section, then we are not likely to find more
than one in the central subdivision, especially when we note that it
contains only three letters. This would leave the fourth vowel to be
found in the third subdivision.

Thus, we have applied pointer No. 1. For the application of pointer
No. 2, we turn to the contact data. Comparing first the three letters
_R D V_, and making a careful inspection of all cryptogram letters
whose frequency is 3 or lower, we find that, of our three letters,
the letter _R_ has 7 contacts with low-frequency letters, the letter
_D_ has 9, and the letter _V_ has 8. Thus, the letter _R_, though
having a higher frequency than the other two, has fewer low-frequency
contacts than either, and so begins to draw away and assume the
aspect of a consonant.

The application of pointers Nos. 3, 4, and 5, provides no satisfactory
distinction. But in pointer No. 8, we find a very clear distinction:
_D_ and _V_ have touched each other only once, while _R_ has contacted
both with a total of six contacts — a great many for a cryptogram of
this length.

We decide, then, that _R_ is a consonant, and that _D_ and _V_ are
vowels.

Considering the central subdivision, where we expect to find one
vowel: Application of pointer No. 2 shows that _S_ has four of the
low-frequency contacts, while _F_ has two and _Z_ has only one.
Further examination of _S_ by pointer No. 3 shows that it has an
unusual variety in its contact-letters. Thus, _S_ would appear to be
the vowel here.

As to the third section, there is so little difference in frequency
between these letters and some others not included in the
high-frequency class, that any distinction found would not be
convincing.

The individual cryptogram, however, has happened to contain the
sequences _VXXU_, _SRRV_, _SZZD_, _DNNV_. Application of pointer No.
6 confirms our previous selection of _D_, _V_, _S_, as vowels, and
suggests that the letter _U_ might also represent a vowel. Since the
frequency of this letter is only 2, we cannot feel so confident in
drawing conclusions about it; however, a glance at the contact data
shows that it has touched four different letters, which is 100%
variety, that one of these four letters is an accepted consonant, and
that none of the other three, so far, is an accepted vowel (pointers
3 and 8). The chances are that this letter _U_, with its low
frequency, represents _y_ in some such formation as _ally_, _ully_,
_etty_, etc.

With four vowels tentatively isolated, we are now in a position to
apply pointer No. 7, and this we may do by returning to the cryptogram
and marking for attention each appearance of each supposed vowel. This
is usually done by circling each one with a pencil mark. In Fig. 66,
a small letter “v” has served the same purpose, and a few serial
numbers have been added for convenience of reference. Now let us
examine Fig. 66.

At (a), watching the small “v’s,” we find a fairly uniform
distribution of vowels except for three long segments beginning,
respectively, at the 20th, 27th, and 37th letters. For convenience,
these have been copied out at (b). The two of these which are longer,
and therefore most likely to contain at least one of the missing
vowels, are both found to have included _Z_ and _J_. Of these two
letters, _Z_ is one which was previously discarded (from the central
section of the high-frequency group) during our preliminary
investigation. Examining it again, to make sure, we find it now as a
double between two supposed vowels, and having two additional contacts
with supposed vowels (pointers 6 and 8). But _J_, we find, has never
contacted any supposed vowel; it reverses with a supposed consonant,
and shows as much variety as could be expected of a letter appearing
only three times.


                                  Figure 66
  (a)
     v     ?     v     v        v     v     v  v     v  v        ?        25
  F  D  R  J  N  U  H  V  X  X  U  R  D  M  D  S  K  V  S  O  P  J  R  K  Z

  v           ?        v        v                 v           v     v     50
  D  Y  F  Z  J  X  G  S  R  R  V  T  Q  Y  R  W  D  A  R  W  D  F  V  R  K

  v  v        v     v     v        v           v        v     v     v     v 75
  V  D  R  K  V  T  D  F  S  Z  Z  D  Y  F  R  D  N  N  V  O  V  T  S  X  S

        v                                                                   80
  A  W  V  Z  R


  (b)  20-25                       27-32                   37-41

       O P J R X Z                 Y F Z J X G             T Q Y R W
           ? t                           ?                       t


  (c)
  F  D  R  J  N  U  H  V  X  X  U  R  D  M  D  S  K  V  S  O  P  J  R  K  Z
     e  t  i     y     o        y  t  e     e  a  h  o  a        i  t  h

  D  Y  F  Z  J  X  G  S  R  R  V  T  Q  Y  R  W  D  A  R  W  D  F  V  R  K
  e           i        a  t  t  o           t     e     t     e     o  t  h

  V  D  R  K  V  T  D  F  S  Z  Z  D  Y  F  R  D  N  N  V  O  V  T  S  X  S
  o  e  t  h  o     e     a        e        t  e        o     o     a     a

  A  W  V  Z  R
        o     t

  (d)
     Preliminary assumptions:      y t e . e a h o a .       t h o e t h o .
     CORRECTIONS:                  y t O . O a h E a .       t h E O t h E .
                                   ...to go ahead...         ...the other...

  (e)
  F  D  R  J  N  U  H  V  X  X  U  R  D  M  D  S  K  V  S  O  P  J  R  K  Z
     o  t  i     y     e        y  t  o     o  a  h  e  a        i  t  h
  N           F                          G                 D  W

  Notify  *e**y  to  go  ahead  with.......


The acceptance of _J_ provides five of the vowels, with frequencies
of 10, 9, 6, 2, and 3 — a total of 30 out of an expected 32. In a
longer cryptogram, we should probably look for the sixth vowel among
those letters having approximately the correct frequency for making
up the expected 40%. As to the present case, we should have no trouble
selecting it from the five-letter segment at (b); but this would cause
us to spot also the short word in which it is used, and our immediate
concern is that of spotting vowels only through their known
characteristics as vowels. We will assume, then, that the last vowel
cannot be found.

The next step demands that we assign to the most frequent of the
supposed vowels the value _e_, which happens to be a wrong assumption.
Concerning this, it may be well to repeat here something which has
already been said: In dealing with the simplest of cryptograms, there
is often a short detour into trial and error. Also, the average
decryptor, accustomed to the work, and fully aware of what he may
expect from only 80 letters of text, will usually pause at this point
and make some further observations before filling in any of his
substitutions. However, there is value even in the making of wrong
substitutions; the actual placing of supposed plaintext values in
their supposed positions puts the plaintext possibilities before us
_in visual form_, causing us to note easily those very points for
which the experienced decryptor examines in advance.


                                   Figure 67

  1. F D R J N   U H V X X   U R D M D   S K V S O   P J R K Z   D Y F Z J   

     X G S R R   V T Q Y R   W D A R W   D F V R K   V D R K V   T D F S Z

     Z D Y F R   D N N V O   V T S X S   A W V Z R.
                                                      (80 letters).

  2. H V X X U   T V W D T   R A Z D Y   F Z J X T   V S O U R   D S Z R N

     S E D T S   Q X U L K   S E V O T   D W W V O   D R K V T   G S R R V   

     T Q Y R A   Y M M V A   R P V A K   D Y X O H   V V W K S   G G V T J

     F M S R R   K J A R K   T D Y M K   T J Z K S   T O A L R   K J F H R

     K V U G S   U M T S F   R R K V A   Y Q A J O   U R K S R   U D Y A W

     D H V D N.
                  (155 letters. - Total for both cryptograms: 235).


At (c), then, we have made our substitutions. We have assumed that
the most frequent vowel, _D_, is representing _e_. Having noted the
v-v digrams _DS_, _VD_, _VS_, we have selected _S_, rather than _V_,
as the substitute for _a_, preferring a digram _oa_ (_DS_) to a
digram _ao_ (_VD_). This leaves the vowel of second frequency, _V_,
to represent _o_. This will cause the third of the v-v digrams (_VS_)
to represent _oe_, not frequent, but better than the digram _ao_
previously mentioned. _J_, then, probably represents _i_, and _U_ may
represent _y_.

As to consonants, we have assigned the value _t_ to the most frequent
one, _R_, and there has been no difficulty in identifying _h_ in the
letter _K_, which three times has followed _R_. But our present
cryptogram is too short to provide any clear distinction among letters
which might represent _n_, _r_, _s_. With the seven substitutions
made, as shown at (c), notice how quickly it becomes possible to spot
the incongruity of sequences _tho_, more than once, in a short text
which contains not a single occurrence of _he_ or _ha_. Notice again,
at (d), how quickly the mere exchanging of the values _e_ and _o_
will bring out word-suggestions.

At (e), the first line of the cryptogram is repeated, as it would
appear after the making of this exchange. The beginning of the
message can almost be read: The first word appears to be _notify_,
furnishing two new substitutes. Three more can be furnished in the
suggested sequence _to go ahead with_. And here, the word _with_
would be tried in any case, because it is a common word, and because
the frequency of the letter _P_ is suggestive of _w_. Arrived at this
point, we begin to notice patterns: _postpone_, _council_, _account_,
_matter_, and so on; so that the rest of the solution is largely a
matter of filling in framework. In the given example, it would also
be noticed that _F_ and _N_ have resulted from reciprocal
encipherment; this may not be the case with other letters, but it
presents a possibility which is always well-worth investigating.


                             Figure 68

              Digram Count for the Longer Cryptograms


                          (First-Letters)

         A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q  R S T U V W X Y Z
      A        1           1         1   1  2 1     3     1    A  11
      B                                                        B
      C                                                        C
      D          1 1         1   1   1      3   3 1 2 4     3  D  21
      E                                       2                E   2
      F        2           2                  1           3    F   8 *
   S  G              1                        1 1 1     1      G   5
   e  H        1   1                 1            1            H   4 *
   c  I                                                        I
   o  J  1                   2         1    1   2           2  J   9
   n  K  1                     1 1         10 1       1     1  K  16
   d  L  1                                        1            L   2
  {.  M        1   1             1                1       2    M   6
   L  N        2           1       1        1                  N   5 *
   e  O                    1                  2 1   3   1      O   8
   t  P                              1      1                  P   2
   t  Q                                       1 2         1    Q   4
   e  R  3     3   2   1   1   1            4 4 1 3 1     2 2  R  28 *
   r  S        2   1 3       4   1 1            3   2   1      S  18
   s  T        2             2   1   1        1   1 6   1      T  15
      U                            1 2      1 1     1   3      U   9
      V          1 1 1 4     6   1 1 1 1    2   2   1 2        V  24
      W  2     1                            2       2 1        W   8
      X                    2             1    1     2   2 1    X   9
      Y  2     6                         2                     Y  10
      Z  1         2       1 1                2     1       1  Z   9
         A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q  R S T U V W X Y Z
                   9   5           4       27

                         Most Frequent Digrams

                RK, 10    KV,  6    WD,  4    SR,   4
                VT,  6    DY,  6    RR,  4    KS,   4
                                              HV,   4


  * * *

_The Digram-Solution Method_. — This method, representing another of
our many debts to M. E. Ohaver, may be used either in conjunction with
the vowel method, or independently, as the fundamental method of
attack. For a satisfactory demonstration, however, we need more
material, and Fig. 67 shows our cryptogram again, together with a
suspected reply. Thus we have a length of 235 letters, so that the
preparation of contact-notations, which we found sufficient in the
preceding case, becomes here an irksome task.

For these longer cryptograms, it is usually best to put all of our
data into the form of a _digram-count_, as indicated in Fig. 68. This
is most easily done as follows: Using a sheet of cross-section paper,
mark off the limits of a 26 x 26 square; write the normal alphabet
across the top, so that each of its letters will govern a column; and
write it again along one side, so that each letter will govern a row.
For added convenience, these two alphabets may be repeated, as they
are shown in the figure. Now, remembering that each letter in the
text is the first letter of a digram (except the two which are
finals), our two texts, with their total of 235 letters, are to
provide a count on 233 digrams. Taking letters one by one, just as
they come in the cryptograms, find each letter in the upper alphabet;
find, in the side alphabet, the letter which immediately follows it
in the cryptogram, and count this digram by placing a tally-mark in
the cell at which the column and row governed by these two letters
are found to intersect. In the figure, the tally-marks have been
replaced with numbers showing their totals. It will be noted that the
process described is identically the method which would have been
used by Meaker in preparing the digram chart; and, just as in the
case of the digram chart, the counting of the digrams has
automatically counted the single letters. To obtain their frequencies,
we may total either the columns or the rows, taking the larger figure
in those few discrepancies caused by initial or final letters. With
the chart understood, the digram-method of solution can be shown in a
nutshell.

An inspection of this chart enables us to find quickly that the
leading digrams are those listed: _RK_, _VT_, _KV_, _DY_, etc. These,
almost certainly, are the substitutes for digrams ranking high on the
normal list, and many others, having a frequency of 3, are very likely
indeed to be substitutes for digrams from that same high-frequency
class. Our text, of course, is still short, even with 235 letters,
and we do not invariably find, in texts of this length, that the
ranking digram (in this case _RK_, frequency 10) is the substitute
for _th_, though the chances are, at all times, that it is. And
should it prove here that _RK_ does not represent _th_, then we may
be quite sure that _th_ is represented in one of the digrams _VT_,
_KV_, _DY_, having the next frequency, 6. With the single exception
of _RR_, each digram of the nine which are listed below the chart can
be checked against three other digrams: Its own reversal; the doubling
of its first letter; and the doubling of its second letter. In
addition, it may be checked through the individual frequencies of its
two component letters. These points of comparison, made for each of
the nine leading digrams, have been tabulated in Fig. 69, so that the
discussion may be easily followed.

Examining _RK_, assumed to represent _th_: Its reversal, _KR_, has
not appeared on the chart, which is satisfactory for a digram of no
greater frequency than its supposed original, _ht_. The doubling of
its first letter, _RR_, has appeared four times, which is satisfactory
for _tt_, one of the leading doubles of our language. The doubling of
its second letter, _KK_, has not appeared, which is eminently
satisfactory for a digram as rare as _hh_. Its first letter, _R_, has
a frequency of 28, the highest in the cryptogram, which is not at all
unusual in the case of _t_; and its second letter, _K_, has a
frequency of 16, a little high for _h_, but not unsatisfactory. Thus,
we find nothing, so far, to contradict the supposition that the
digram _RK_ is the substitute for _th_. But if _K_ represents _h_, it
should be possible to find digrams beginning with _K_ which will
check equally well as the substitutes for _ke_ and _ka_. We do, in
fact, find _KV_ and _KS_. But which is which? Examination of Fig. 69
shows that one of these, _KS_, has a reversal, _SK_, frequency 1; but
this is not informative, since it would be equally expected of _eh_
or _ah_. Further examination shows that _V_ has been doubled, which
is far more characteristic of _e_ than of _a_. Also, the individual
frequency of _V_, 24, is the second highest in the cryptogram, and
more likely to be that of _e_ than that of _a_. Thus we may assume
that _KV_ represents _he_ and that _KS_ represents _ha_. This
automatically identifies the digram _SR_ as _at_. As to _VT_, this,
apparently, involves the only reversal of any prominence in the
cryptogram. Its first letter has already been identified as _e_, and
the outstanding reversal of the language is _er_-_re_. This is not so
certain as in the preceding cases, but the frequency of _T_ is
satisfactory as that of _r_.

Thus we have identified the letters _t_, _h_, _e_, _a_, _r_, which is
as far as the tabulation has been carried. Having the substitute for
_h_, we may now bring in the vowel-solution method through examination
of digrams _KD_, _KJ_, _KT_, _KZ_; or continue with the
digram-solution method by looking over the field for some of the other
_h_-digrams: _sh_, _ch_, _wh_, _ph_, _gh_, and so on. The first of
these should be easily identified by the frequency of _s_, and, in
addition to the regular three check-digrams, we might check this
against a possible _st_, another of our leading English digrams. With
the process explained, we need not go further; the substitution of
letters _t_, _h_, _e_, _a_, _r_, _s_, will surely break any simple
substitution cryptogram. Possibly, enough has not been said as to the
use of the trigram list, the consideration of common affixes, common
short words, and so on; but these are all points which the student
can best develop for himself.


                                Figure 69

        Digram         Doubled Letter    Letter Frequency      Supposed
                                                               Identity
  Original  Reversed    1st      2d        1st       2d

  R K  10   K R...     R R  4   K K...    R 28      K 16         t h
  V T   6   T V   2    V V  1   T T...    V 24      T 15         e r
  K V   6   V K...     K K...   V V  1    K 16      V 24         h e
  D Y   6   Y D...     D D...   Y Y...    D 2l      Y 10          ?
  W D   4   D W   1    W W  1   D D...    W  8      D 2l          ?
  S R   4   R S...     S S...   R R  4    S 18      R 28         a t
  K S   4   S K   1    K K...   S S...    K 16      S 18         h a
  R R   4    ....       ....     ....          R 28              t t
  H V   4   V H...     H H...   V V  1    H  5      V 24          ? (-e)


Another point, however, must not be overlooked: _the long repeated
sequences_ _HVXXU_, _ZDYFZJX_, _DRKVT_, _GSRRVT_. Repeated sequences
of these lengths will usually come from _repeated whole words_, making
it possible, to some extent, to attack the cryptogram by word-division
methods. It is, in fact, the repetition of sequences, these and many
others, which, in the beginning, has led us to assume that both
cryptograms are using the same key. As to the recovery of this key, we
need not wait until solution is complete. Even in simple substitution,
it is well, during the identification of substitutes, to have before
us a sort of skeleton key, in which the plaintext alphabet has been
written out in normal order, so that the substitutes, as fast as
their identities are discovered, can be placed below their originals.

Thus, having identified as many as twelve letters in our present
cryptogram, this skeleton key, or framework, might begin to assume
the appearance which is indicated in the upper tabulation of Fig. 70.
Here, we are able to note a reciprocal encipherment between _A_ and
_S_, _F_ and _N_, _R_ and _T_, and _U_ and _Y_, suggesting that the
whole encipherment may have been reciprocal; if so, we have the
identities of four additional substitutes: _O_, _I_, _H_, _E_,
representing _d_, _j_, _k_, _v_, respectively. If they are present
in the cryptogram, these four substitutions may be tried; but with
or without their presence in the cryptogram, they can be added to the
skeleton key, as in the lower tabulation of the figure. Notice that
when this has been done, the cipher alphabet is beginning to show
alphabetical sequences (reversed). We find _H I J K_, and, just
before this, _D F_, which is an alphabetical sequence if the letter
_E_ has been taken out for use in a key-word. Between _DF_ and _HIJK_
of the cipher alphabet, we need only _G_ to fill out the sequence;
therefore either _l_ or _m_ must belong to the key-word; comparing
this with what is found at the other end of the sequence, we find
that either _L_ or _M_ would be the substitute for _g_. Between _NO_,
we find _V_, evidently misplaced; and, following _O_ and preceding
_S_, we find two positions which may be occupied by two of the
letters _PQR_, of which _R_ has already been placed (under _t_). That
is, where the encipherer has used a key-word-mixed alphabet without
troubling to carry it through a transposition process of any kind, we
are often able to build it up again, and make it help us in the
solution. This is especially true if he has used reciprocal
encipherment; with the substitutes which may actually be found in our
foregoing cryptograms, a little rearrangement is all that is needed
in order to discover exactly what the original key was. When the
cipher alphabet has been carried through a transposition block, it is
not so easy to recover during the actual process of solution;
afterward, however, it is not usually difficult to treat it by one of
the transposition processes, just as if it were a transposition
cryptogram of 26 letters. In the examples which follow, the
key-word-mixed alphabets were used as they stood, though we believe
that none of the encipherment was reciprocal. In one case, however,
the plaintext and cipher alphabets were both mixed, according to
different key-words, so that the recovery of this key may prove
troublesome.


                                Figure 70

  Supposing 12 substitutes to have been identified:

    Plaintext alphabet: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
    CIPHER ALPHABET:    S       V N   K J         F D     T A R Y       U

  Assuming reciprocal substitution:

    Plaintext alphabet: a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
    CIPHER ALPHABET:    S     O V N   K J I H     F D     T A R Y E     U   
                          Q?P?  *   L?         G?     C?B?*       *       T?
                                    M?


45.  By PICCOLA.

S C Y J T   O P N R M   J T U E A   W S R O R   O A E P Q   R J C R O   A R M P H
Q K J Q S   R S J H A   X P F K E   A Q R M Y   S R P Q P   M P S E C   A H G A W
S R O P E   E E S H A   Q O P V S   H I R O A   Q P F A E   A H I R O   P H N P Q
R J H T F   U A M C J   M R Y R O   M A A W A   E E B T Q   R W M S R   A S R J H
A I M J T   K U A E J   W P H J R   O A M P H   N Q A A W   O P R Y J   T Q A A L.

46.  By PICCOLA. (Plaintext and Cipher Alphabets have each a key-word).

J C W E H   S N D F S   B N J I V   T E A G V   D H O C Q   Q I Q F R   P H F K Q
E A R F Q   A R F A H   F Q E J C   B N J N H   B E O C B   N L N O V   H B L F Q
J B N A B   L F V H C   A J I V B   N W N S T   B L E A G   V A J N S   R F W N S
Y R V S S   C A E H V   A Q F C J   E A G J N   A W N S O   V B V C Q   Y D C S P
H E H O C   S P E A G   B E O N A   F R L C A   G N E A K   C S O N S   H A C B E
F A C Q X.

47.  By PALOMITA.  (No key-word).

B O Y B A   N K I L L   A P K R I   Y A P Y Y   U P B L Y   E R P B P   L G Y G M
H L A B O   Y K J A K   L P Y L H   H J A C R   P O R C Q   U Y N B H   L A B O Y
G N A Z N   Y L H B O   Y K N A N   P R B R W   O J C B R   C Q D N P   K.

48.  By PICCOLA.  (Of these two, one has normal word divisions; the other has not).

W T  E I C  H E P P C  A E P T J  W P O Y D  Q P  R M E L U  E I N D E P Q  T C
Q D Q D P C P D  H K G  E P U O P Q D Q  U Q D J I C.   I S Y E  Q  T C P V E M Y R
E W M  E K E C  Q E S P E L  U E I N E ?   P  D Q H U P Q C  G P J  T C V !
E O E E I Q M C I,  P  K J  P E S X Q T E Q M C I  P  K J P D Q D  J I D P U P U
C G  G Y J R Q T   E V E M Y  P  D H K G E P Q F D I S.

49.  By PICCOLA.

P B K L A B E I  C D J  D B I  L Y P K  L D  O I X  L Y I  P K  V Y A L ?
A G F Y A M I L K  L Y I K I  D C  A G G  L D  O I X V D J R K  L Y I  C P B R P B N
X D Q  A J I ?    Q K  J I S P B R K  L Y A L  A B R  M X  Q F  P L  F P E O  L D
I B R  V Y P E Y  O B D V  X D Q  P C  E G I A J  F I J C I E L G X  P K
S I A B P B N  P L K.   A J P K L D E J A L  A B  B D L  P K  L Y P K  B D !




CHAPTER X
The Consonant-Line Short Cut
_A Method for Attacking Difficult Cases_
By George C. Lamb
 
Several routine methods have been evolved for special use on the very
difficult “aristocrat” — that fascinating form of simple substitution
with word-divisions in which the message is of no importance whatever
and the encipherer’s full attention has been given to manipulation of
letter characteristics. Of the several such methods which have proved
workable over a long period of years, the author’s favorite is the
“consonant-line” method, the exact value of which has been tested in
a special analysis of 130 very difficult cryptograms. However, it
should be stated clearly that no method is a mechanical crypt-solver;
these devices merely serve to bring out clues which to the haphazard
worker are totally invisible. For discussion, we will consider an
example by M. E. Bosley which appeared as No. 19 Aristocrat in _The
Cryptogram_ for June, 1936. This is shown at Fig. 71.

The work must be initiated by isolating a small group of consonants,
and the problem of selecting these with certainty is one which for
years has baffled the shrewdest solvers of both the National Puzzlers’
League and the American Cryptogram Association. Many successful
solvers have based their selection on frequency alone, rearranging
the letters of a frequency count in the order of decreasing frequency
and marking off a section of low-frequency letters which will
presumably include only consonants. But the clever manipulator is
able to distort frequencies out of all resemblance to the normal
table, and here we will base our selection on _variety of contact_
— something which the constructor cannot successfully manipulate.


                                  Figure 71

  U W Y M N X K A   E H X R B Z   U V X M U W B Z   O Y Z T W H V C X Y A
  C Y A U Z    D B R A H V K B A;     Z W S V A H K U Z B K C,    M S C X
  C Y X B S,    X V Z Y T R Y C X P.



Fig. 72 sums up the entire process. At (a) we have a list of contacts
taken in the order of appearance of the letters, and at (b) a
rearrangement of the cryptogram letters _in the order of decreasing
variety of contact_. Immediately above each letter is its “variety
count” and directly above this is its frequency figure. In this
set-up, a certain number of letters taken at the extreme right may
confidently be marked off as a group of consonants. As to just where
the line of demarcation may be set, recent analysis has shown that it
is safe to include 20% of the total variety-count. In this case, the
sum of all variety-figures is 104, and 20% of this, roughly, is 21.
If we begin with _P_ at the extreme right and add numbers backward
for a count of 21, we find that the line of demarcation falls between
_R_ and _C_. However, we have at this point four letters, _M_, _R_,
_C_, _S_, whose variety-count is uniformly 5, and any two of which
might have occupied the places of _C_ and _S_. To accept a vowel at
this stage would mar the effectiveness of our system, and either we
must discard all four of these letters, or we must find a means of
differentiation other than their variety of contact. At this point,
letter-frequencies come into play.

Examining the set-up just as we have it prepared at (b), note that
the two figures just above _M_ are 3-5. This is a “step-up” of 2
points. Note that just above _R_ we have the same two figures 3-5,
another step-up. Above _C_, we find the two figures 6-5, this time a
“step-down” of 1 point; and above _S_ we again find 3-5, a step-up.
According to years of observation, confirmed by investigation of
special cases, a vowel nearly always shows a tendency to step up,
while consonants are prone to step down. Thus among our four doubtful
letters, there are three, _M_, _R_, and _S_, of which one will
probably be a vowel. But the remaining letter, _C_, has the step-down
peculiar to consonants; and while a step-down of only 1 point would
not be definitely informative when found at the left end of the
set-up, it almost certainly indicates in the present position that
_C_ is a consonant. Thus, we are able to include seven letters,
_C T N E O D P_, in our group of “sure-fire” consonants, but have to
dispense with several points of our 21-count.


                                              Figure 72

                                         (a)  List of Contacts

   U6   W7   Y9   M5   N2   X10  K7   A7   E1   H6   R5   B8   Z6   V8   O1   T4   C5   D1   S5   P1

   -W  U-Y  W-M  Y-H  M-X  N-K  X-A  K-    -H  E-X  X-B  R-Z  B-   U-X   -Y  Z-W  V-X   -B  W-V  X-
   -V  U-B  O-Z  X-U       H-R  V-B  Y-        W-V  B-A  W-Z  B-   H-C       Y-R   -Y       M-C
  M-W  T-H  X-A   -S       V-M  H-D  Y-U       A-V  T-Y  D-R  Y-T  H-K            K-        B-
  A-Z  Z-S  C-A            C-Y  B-C  R-H       A-K       K-A  U-   S-A            S-X
  K-Z       C-X            C-        B-                  Z-K   -W  X-Z             -Y
            Z-T            Y-B       V-H                 X-S  U-B                 Y-X
            R-C             -V                                V-Y
                           C-P

  (The figures give the "variety-count," or number of different letters contacted.  Roversals may be
  indicated by circling letters.  Note that in dealing with normal word-divisions, we may omit contacts
  falling between one word and another).

                 (b)  Basis for Primary Isolation of Consonant-Group:

                      Letter-frequencies:   8 7 6 5 4 4 6 5 4 7 3 3 6 3 2 1 1 1 1 1
                      VARIETY OF CONTACT:  10 9 8 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 4 2 1 1 1 1   (104)
                                            X Y B V W K A U H Z M R C S T N E O D P

  (c)                      (d)                       (e)                        (f)        3d word:
  FIRST CONSONANT LINE     SECOND CONSONANT LINE     THIRD CONSONANT LINE
                                                                                    x   .   x x   x
     C T N E O D P           C T N E O D P A U      C T N E O D P A U W Z           U V X M U W B Z
           │                         │                   │                                    H
          v│                       vv│v               vvv│v
          x│xxxx                    x│xxxx              x│xxxx  (Vowel)         (g)       7th word:
         yy│yyy                  yyyy│yyy           yyyyy│yyyyy (Vowel)
          k│                      kkk│                kkk│                      x x   x x     x x .   x
          s│                        s│                  s│s                     Z W S V A H K U Z B K C
          z│                        z│zz               zz│zz    (Consonant)
           │w                        │www                │wwww  (Consonant H)   (h)       4th word:
           │r                       r│r                 r│r
          m│                       mm│                 mm│                      x . x x x   x x . . x
           │h                        │hhh                │hhhh                  O Y Z T W H V C X Y A
           │b                       b│b               bbb│bbb   (Vowel)                 H
           │                         │u              uuuu│u     (Consonant)
                                    a│                  s│      (Consonant)
                                     │                  t│t     (Consonant)
                                                         │


At (c) we have the beginning stage of the actual investigation, while
(d) and (e) are amplifications of the first stage. In these the
original consonants are used to determine other consonants,
progressing from stage (c) to stage (e). First, the original group of
consonants is set down on a sheet of paper, and the space below it is
bisected by the consonant-line. Consulting (a), we then find the
letters of this group one by one, and all contacting letters which
precede any one of them we set down on the left side of the
consonant-line, and all those which follow any one of them we set
down on the right side, always once for each time that the contacting
letter appears. Thus we have stage (c). While we do not often
encounter doubled letters in this form of cryptogram, it may be well
to say here that while a doubled letter would be counted among the
frequencies of letter appearance, its contacts with itself would not
be entered on the consonant-line. That is, a doubled _L_ would add a
frequency of 2 to the general count, but contacts _L_-_L_ would be
ignored.

At (d) we have the first step in amplification, for which we are
indebted to Chester A. Griffin. If there is any letter in the
cryptogram which _does not appear_ _at all in (c)_, such a letter is
practically sure to be another consonant. In this case we find _A_
and _U_, and in (d) these two letters have been added to the consonant
group and their contacts placed on the consonant-line. From this point
onward, the work becomes more tentative, and, as a detail of
operation, Mr. Griffin suggests that further additions to the
consonant-line be made in another color of lead; if it then becomes a
matter of necessity to erase, only the new letters will be included
in the erasing.


                                     Figure 73

         1               2               3                     4
  x x . x x . x x   x . . x . x   x x . x x x . x   x . x x x . x x . . x
  U W Y M N X K A   E H X R B Z   U V X M U W B Z   O Y Z T W H V C X Y A
    h                                       h               h

      5                6                        7                   8
  x . x x x    x . x x . x x . x     x x . x x . x x x . x x     x . x .
  C Y A U Z    D B R A H V K B A;    Z W S V A H K U Z B K C,    M S C X
                                       h

      9                  10
  x . . . .     . x x . x x . x . x
  C Y X B S,    X V Z Y T R Y C X P.


Further work includes the application of the “force method.” That is,
we turn our attention to the cryptogram itself, marking with a small
cross, or otherwise, all letters determined as consonants, and
placing a dot, or other indication, over all letters determined as
vowels. Some vowels become evident as early as stage (c), as here we
find both _X_ and _Y_ freely contacting our preliminary group of
consonants, and if confirmation is needed, a glance back at set-up
(b) will show that both of these are step-up letters. They may be
labeled vowels without hesitation.

As to consonants, there are two clear text letters, _h_ and _n_,
which, owing to their many contacts with other consonants, and
particularly with the low-frequency consonants (as in the digrams
_CH_, _GH_, _PH_, _WH_, _NG_, _NC_, _NK_, _NQ_, etc.), will often
show up clearly on the consonant-line. Of these two, _n_ will appear
largely upon the left side of the line, and _h_, the more reliable
of the two, upon the right side. Examining (d) we find _W_ and _H_
appearing exclusively on the right side of the line, and since,
under the rules of the game, no letter may be its own substitute,
we may assume here that _W_ represents _h_.

Further concerning _h_: An examination of the cryptogram shows that
_W_ has occurred twice as the second letter of a word, and the
second-position is particularly characteristic of _h_. Then, assuming
that _W_ actually does represent _h_, we have in the seventh word of
the cryptogram an intimation that the letter _Z_ is also a consonant
(since formations like AHEAD, AHA, are very rare, and seldom, if
ever, occur in long words). Thus, we have two new consonants, _W_
and _Z_, to be added to the consonant-line, with their contacts
below, extending operations to stage (e). If desired, the spotted
consonants may now be crossed off on the line itself, or merely
indicated as in (e). It seems evident from (e), confirmed by (b),
that _B_ is our third vowel, and the supposition can be strengthened
by inspecting the third cryptogram word, which, at this time, will
have appeared as in (f). It also appears from (e) and (b), confirmed
by the aspect of the tenth cryptogram word, that _R_ is a consonant.
Similarly, _M_, which, on three appearances, has twice contacted a
vowel, may be placed as a consonant. These two new consonants, _R_
and _M_, are added to the group of known consonants, and all of
their contacts are placed on the consonant-line. Our next victim is
_S_, evidently a vowel in spite of (e) because of its position in
the seventh cryptogram word (g), which, otherwise, must begin with
five consonants in succession. Presuming that a fifth vowel is to be
found, the same word suggests either _K_ or _H_ as the candidate.
The choice falls on _H_, according to the fourth cryptogram word (h);
and thus continuing the force method with one eye on the
consonant-line and the other on the cryptogram, the v-c formation of
the cryptogram is finally established as in Fig. 73. Actual
identification and solution follow the usual path of patterns,
cross-comparison of words, and inspiration, where all systems are
subordinate to the solver’s own perspicacity . . . or “cipher
brains.” Chapter IX has given some methods for identifying letters
from their characteristics, and also mentioned the preparation and
use of pattern-word lists.


                                     Figure 74

  A text prepared by RUFUS T. STROHM:                         H Y N W B D
                                                                   │
  OMRI, UNKEMPT HELP, BRISKLY SCYTHED BUCKWHEAT                  ee│eeee
                                                                  t│t
  CROP.  PANICKY SKYLARK UPSHOT; BUMPKIN SHOWED                   w│
                                                                 ss│
  SMIRK.                                                          o│oo
                                                                  l│l
  Frequency:   8 6 5 4 5 3 4 5 4 6 5 3 4 4 4 3 2 3 2              c│
  Variety:    10 8 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 2 1            kkk│k
               K P E M R A C I O S H L T U Y N W B D              u│uu
                                   x       x x x x x              a│
                                                                  i│i
                                                                   │h
  Amplification at step (d) adds  P and M.                         │r
                                                                   │


At this point, it might be well to mention the “vowel-line” method,
whose appearance was antecedent to that of the consonant-line. This
earlier method was conceived by Erik Boden, and in principle works
in reverse to the consonant-line method. Its set-up is like that of
the consonant-line except that vowels, instead of consonants, are
placed at the top. The contacts made by the determined vowels are
listed fore and aft as is done with the consonants in the
consonant-line method.

The vowel-line shows several letters by certain characteristics
. . . a letter appearing exclusively on the left might represent
_h_, and one appearing solely on the right can be taken for _n_. The
liquids, _l_ and _r_, straddle the line about equally. On the
supposition that you have located three vowels, the list of contacts
on the vowel-line will not include, or only rarely, any other vowels
as yet unidentified. A good suggestion is to use the consonant-line
as specified, and then follow up with the vowel-line, using the
vowels you have _definitely_ identified as such. The result will
be thus: The letter appearing exclusively to the right of the
consonant-line will appear solely on the left of the vowel-line,
and vice versa. If such appearances are noted, then you have spotted
_h_ and _n_ . . . . . identified as suggested in another part of this
chapter.

  * * *

The workability of the consonant-line system in unravelling the
mysteries of the “Dizzy” crypt is best judged by making a series of
preliminary sheets from clear text. In Fig. 74, for instance, we have
the solution to one of the most skillfully manipulated cryptograms in
the collection of 130. This was prepared by Rufus T. Strohm as No. 17
Aristocrat of the April, 1932, _Cryptogram_. The total variety-count
is 104, 20% of which is about 21. The line of demarcation thus falls
in the group _H L T U_, each with a variety-count of 5 and no
step-down. _H_, with figures 5-5, could be grouped with the remaining
letters, giving us _H Y N W B D_ as consonants, with _P_ and _M_ to
be added at step (d). We thus include _Y_ among our sure-fire
consonants, and, in fact, it often is a consonant, but this is a
problem no solver has yet been able to overcome. However, the letter
_Y_ can usually be spotted by _position_. Note that except for _Y_,
every vowel here is a step-up letter.


                                     Figure 75

  A text prepared by J. LLOYD HOOD:                       D C M P B F Q W J K
                                                                   │
  GARGANTUAN MESTIZO ESCORTS JUNOESQUE NEGRO                   aaaa│aaaa
                                                                 oo│ooo
  WOMAN ADOWN NIGHT CLUB AISLE.   DARK HUED                        │eeee
                                                                  n│n
  AMAZON HAD BEAUTIFUL LAPIS-LAZULI PENDANT.                     ss│
                                                                   │l
  Frequency:  14  9  8 6 10 7 6 6 6 4 4 5 3 3 2 3 2 2 1 1 2 1 1   i│i
  Variety:    12 11 11 9  8 8 6 6 6 5 5 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 1   u│uuu
               A  E  U I  N O L S T G R D H Z C M P B F Q W J K   r│
                                        x     x x x x x x x x x

  Amplification at step (d) adds T, G, H, and Z.


The above two examples have represented the “tough” case. In Fig. 75,
where the text is the solution to a crypt by J. Lloyd Hood published
as No. 9 in the February, 1932, _Cryptogram_, we have the average
comparatively simple case. The total variety-count is 118, making the
isolation count about 23 and throwing the line of demarcation into
the group _D H Z_, where _D_ is the only step-down letter. Every
letter in the isolated group is actually a consonant, and step (d)
adds the letters _T G H Z_. On the consonant-line, _A_, _O_, and to
a lesser extent _U_, stand out clearly as vowels. _E_ might be
mistaken for _H_ until we apply the force method, while _I_ shows a
step-up of three points, in addition to whatever shows up on the
cryptogram. So up and at ’em! Edgar Allan Poe spoke truly when he
suggested that whatever the human mind can devise, the human mind
can also untangle.

  * * *

Note: For additional methods of analytical attack on this kind of
cryptogram, the student is referred to the booklet “Cryptogram
Solving,” by M. E. Ohaver. This can be purchased directly from the
author (Columbus, Ohio) for twenty-five cents, or may be purchased
from the Frank A. Munsey Company. The textbooks of the National
Puzzlers League also include chapters devoted to the solving of
cryptograms; further information concerning these may be had by
writing to R. T. Strohm, 1328 E. Gibson Street, Scranton, Pa.
                                                           H. F. G.


50.  By ROBO.

POUYH    IBQUAV    PUKO    M    EGUHAC    MK    KOH    POUKH
OBLJH,   KOHBSBGH   GBBJHNHYK   GHSHUNHC   MA   UAWLGR    KB 
BAH   HRH   POUSO   SMLJHC   IYUACAHJJ.

51.  By SUE DE NYMME.

IDFURSF   UJBDOC   UJY   NEGNXDNOWN   IDFU   FUN   CXJKGDOC
JOY   RGGXNKKDBN   AJO   IN   WJOORF   JGGXNWDJFN  FUN
JZZJHDMDFL   RZ   FUN   URONKF   JOY   CNONXRSK."  --RXDNOFJM
JYJCN.

52.  By I TAPPA KE.

B   HCN   FBA  IOA   CAXW   PBXLSBW   RAMC   MPJ   SCCHK.
BLMJI   MPBM   PJ   RK   IOAARAN   COM   CL   MPJ   SCCHK.

53.  By TRYCHS.

ZAXABAPRSANL   CDRLT   ZNLZDLSERSANL   NQ   WNWFBRSANL,  ZBNTD
FSABAPRSANL   NQ   SKD   BRLU,   TWEDRU   NQ   ALUFTSEV -- RBB 
UEAXD   HABU   BAQD   RHRV.

54.  By DECIBEL.

KTJ   UZ   WJIWNLUFZA,  RNUJW   FV   NYYWZQFBNUJCP   ZAJ   IZTWUG 
KJJYJW   UGNA   FU   NYYJNWV   UZ   MJ   RGJA   CZZDFAH   FAUZ   FU.

55.  By B. NATURAL.

GBAM   BP   NCLBGMC: -- IBAM   FDCCDIH   HKULC   BP   DSBD,  RBGE 
BP   BPTBLPL,   AGDKC   BP   RBVSBULP,   FLEMH   VLEM  BP  BGGBPDBH. 
SKHFLPT   LNM   BN   BP   RBHHDKCB,   UDN   BPTBUMHNBDP   BP 
NMPPMHHMM,   NDDE   FBVLCF   BP   EMPNKVEW.

56.  By POSIUS.

SHTOADDCTUD   TO   SLIHCTICDP   LHA   XCZA   IHALICAD   TO   SALFA 
-- IEAR   TUXR   KCUB   ICXX   VA   LHA   DIHTUM   AUTNME   IT 
KHALZ   IEAP.  -- ABPNUB  KNHZA.

57.  By LIGHTNING.

QFY.   NZZDO,   YOFLAVU   HAVVOF   NVVBCVSOY:  "FOSAZO   RBF 
YBCZ   AY   RFBQ   DNKO   QFY.   HCQZDAVU;  BCK   BR   FOYZOSK 
RBF   WOF,   A   YCUUOYK   YBCZ   GO   ONKOV  AV   YADOVSO!"

58.  By BOUNCING BOB.

ACGLCRW   BDHMW   AHSXGE.  "XI   EHN   TCYD   DH   WBDCFSXBO 
GMWVXD   OWMW,   EHN   ZNBD   FW   CD   SWCBD   WXRODE   EWCMB 
HSV   CYV   CGGHZACYXWV   FE   EHNM   ACMWYDB."

59.  By MISISEEG.

"PC   KFJJW   LF   LPAS   YG   KF   CYNE   FH   WFYJ   LRCS," 
KPRI   MYITS,   RDOSLSJPLS   PHLSJ-IRDDSJ   KGSPASJ,  PK  ES 
KSDLSDNSI   CPD   LF   DRDSLW-DRDS   WSPJK.

60.  By EEGH.

EZVPJHOW   HJWZB   JZKRCHSPO   HRRCHAOF   OZAPEFE   CSTF 
JHWFBRSCCHB   JBHVCSPL   ZNFB   RFBOSHP   BAL   VISCOW   VFHBSPL 
BAQQFB   OIZFO.

61.  By MERLIN.

ABDZYX   UYDU   ZA   VYWZCE   FBGH   DBVTYCF   SJJX   YU   RBVJ, 
JKJC   URBGER   FBG   LZAR   URJF   LJHJ.

62.  By P. A. BEE.

"ZHN   TCJP   VDTK   QHWWQF   CLTDRP   NDTX;  ZHN   CLGFP   VDTK 
QHWWQF   WTF   LTDRP   NDTX."   MSHLJ   VTQJP   ZB   VCJFP   LCR 
GTCA   WGF   PQTX.   LDBEW   ITJFP   VDTK   PSLG   HOFCP   NDTX!

63.  By SHORTY.

ABCDEFB   XYGF   HXYNEP   OF   QNHA   BDRXA   SYB   SDPRFAZ 
XYNHFKDSF   KXY   EDTFH   VXCURDUR   SNBUDANBF   CBYNUP   FIFBZ 
KFFT   YB   AKY.   BYNRX   PFAYNB   KYNEP   ANBU   AXF   ABDVT.

64.  By AH TIN DU.

ABCD   ABEFGHJ   KGLA: -- MKNNDOH   PBOLA,   FBPDE   AMBNNGHJ, 
ARBON   PBOLA   KHL   KSSGTDA.   PRDH   NRDAD   SKGE,   NOW 
XRKON   KHL   CGLHGJRN   BGE.

                          T I P   O F F S

For the benefit of the beginner a list of "tip-offs" are given below.
By comparing these groups, affixes and single letters it is possible
to find combinations which fit.  For instance: ABC compared with ABCD,
ABGA, GA, DHA might result in "the", "then", "that", "at", "not", etc.

50.  M, MK, KB, KOH, BAH, MA, PUKO.
51.  FUN, IDFU, IN, IDFURSF.
52.  B, MPJ, MPBM, PJ, RA-, -RAN.
53.  AL-, -SANL, ZNL-, SKD.
54.  UZ, FAUZ, FU, -FAH, -UFZA, FV, ZAJ.
55.  BP, BP-, -NBDP.
56.  IT, TO;  IEAR, IEAP, AUTNME.
57.  A, AV, -AVU;  BR, RBF, RFBQ.
58.  DH, CD, CYV, HSV; identify W through its frequency.
59.  Note Pattern group;   DRDSLW-DRDS.
60.  SPL; O; EFE, word 5, last word.
61.  Use of J, LJHJ, JKJC, -ZCE, ZA.
62.  WGF, QHWWQF, WTF.
63.  AXF, KXY, AKY;  FIFBZ, YB.
64.  -GHJ, KHL.

65.  By KING SLY.

KING   NERO   PRVBY   KHNC   AVCL,   FHYYVY   CAVRDLK   CHFN. 
DEAF   TFENGY   IC;   DHULY   ERBV   YCHTL.   RIBY   XHFF, 
ERTFIKERD   FHYYEL.

66.  By THE SHADOW.

FJ   CIGBHQ   KDDH,   LDQ   FJJPHLC   DXXCIGBHQ   CAP.   LDQQDHP 
BCCAP:   EBQMJ   DXX;  JPHLC   KDDHEBQMJ   BC   QDHP.

67.  By "33".

OXVXAKZDKY   KYKOMSQXDI   DIAB   ABOQSXIZW   ZWIALBV   BVXQDO. 
DOSQDOXASZ   SZSOPXYQ   YQSOQZBY   BYQLBO,   BOOSQXA   XADIDAZSYQ.

68.  By BUBBLES.

SBCWFK   VWUKPI   FCRSX   PFNUKVSB.   VWZGRE   XZKRP   ZBTFV. 
WPGU   SFGDJ   DPERBFGP;  VPIFZ   TPASX   JKPVA   IKOBCU   OGPRIV.

69.  By DEAN RELAX.

XYZABCD   ZEFZGBAZHDBHI   JBDY   KGLMZOCNHBDZ   OBCXNMZGC   XKPXBQA 
KABO   SPKXT   ANHNXPBHBX   FPZNXYGNBX   FGBCAC.

70.  By WEHANONOWIT.

ZYXWVXUTSRQUXO   PXWVTW   ZWNZXMXRTL   XOOTKQXRQKT   YNWRQUSORSWT: 
ZWNJSUTL   RXIXUTRSV,   ONHTOQX,   YTJTNVX,   JQMQRXOQL,  TR 
UTRTWX,  XJ   QIPQIQRSV.

71.  By CURLY.

WINIWKB   OWBWO   KRSRKVRV   CRSRC   NWEWN   WCTPXVQBR   XWKWXR. 
AWKWARD   TJJRKV   VQPQVDRK   DZKRWD.   KRSRKRPD   BWOVRC   AKWEV, 
GWKKQRB   HE   JCTTB   DZKM   BQSQBR.

72.  By GALUPOLY.

LKMEGDIMJ,   LHFABCGNKEF,   LSNJJDI,   LBMNKCJ,   LBMEFJP   MJR 
LBTNIG   GMVN   RDSSDAXTK   RNADLBNEDJI   SCE   AEFLKCIEMLBNE.

73.  By SABIO.

WILD   PANGRAMS   RDMB   ALCW   EFFRRD   HLFEM   INJW.   HAKNLLO 
QLNTNW.   INJW   TFFRRD   NIIRD   UGUGVWG,   WJGORTX   RDMB 
PAYWV   XDOMAT   ROZAVD.

74.  By GINHUTS.

OLDMADE   OVID   SLATILK,   ZLOMLX   VWXYB,   WERK   SLMB   LERVI, 
NLI   CLRO   EVRS   GKTV   OTAHB   ADGV   TVWEY,   YBLTO   LISWR 
RLDEWLEB.

75.  By CIPHERMIT.

ABZYC   DXXZBF,   GYZBHVDX   SZBHC,   SGYBZTH   VRZBS   JKZBVXQ 
FBZUB   YDWZBY,   WXZBYF,   BZTRV   WZBF,   RDHCEBYMRZBS,   FZBIB, 
YBZHF,   HBMEVZB;   MRZBS   YBVYZBIBF   QZBXC.

76.  By A. D. CODER.

ABCDEFB   GHICD   CJKLIC   MNHHSJ   OPCIQG   MNJRBD   PLFGSPLBR, 
EILQ   KICDTSCIR  KICJRAC  HL   PLDRSJ   GOFBBSIDQCNR.

77.  By ROVING VIC.

MOCKMOCK   ZPLY  KPYO   RSRI-RSRI  FIPTSU  FLIPFLIP.  NERTS-NERTS 
WICHWICH,   SHPYSHPY   TCYL,   SILLSILL,   MREX   UPMD   XRT. 
APTS-ACTS   WEPMWERM   OLIREZU   WPTRE   MHIL.

78.  By AMSCO.

ABWKGLWB   ELTFTELHEG,   SENGLMTUG   FTELSABWKGLTF,   LGBTGXGU 
KHLCTHK   DHTF   BTOG   HFATFH   DGKESLTU.

79.  By M. G. M.

ABCDECBFA,   GHDIJKLF,   HFBMD,   NLHMO   IEDHOBF   OPPMGHR, 
SMPDBIDBO   UR   VPHD,   OMHGUMEONB,   SPMDILFFEA.

80.  By SIMPLICIUS.

VKJPE   PBSCKZ   RLHRTGM   HJALCGSBR   TLCG;  RKPHCLRHM 
NLMHGJCGAAKMBM;  LIUJCGM   NJCMJBH   KQ   CKZGPHM.

81.  By KRIPTOBENS.

DYFR   SWCX   VHZS   WMLB   TMLB   CZYO   PHUT   WKHT,   JKOS 
MOSY   PHOB,  NHTK   IKAR   AMLW   WHCU,   DUKT!   LMSR   LYZV 
ECMQ   XKOS,   DMOT   VHNK,   VMLB,   PUCK!   VHDK   YZKO,   GHLB 
UYVS!   WHAT   BOYS,   YOUR   LUCK!

82.  By PHONEY.

ABCDE   FEGHI,   GEJBI;  KLBGI   MDCEH   NDEST   IEKRD   DREIN 
UMELV.   TLHNR   RGHBD   HLWJI   SRMHN,   VESTI   JHEKB,   XBDJI 
LDENB   YRDIB;  PDRGV   ZRDSI,   BKLWNI   OEDJF   WYBEN.  CEGOF 
EOLBM.

83.  By ARROWHEAD.

ABCDEF   GHIJK,   LMN   OPQR,   STU   VWXY.   ZWHTAJ,   FBIDEB 
PEWCUH   VHAXMP,   HJQD   BHXEJ   XHUTA,   EQGIF   GTJE   IHWREJMP.

84.  By THE GRIFFIN.

TWDOIUESMA   DMPOIREXYK   TRXAWEKMLI   XRYMUOLSED   AMIEXKUGNO 
MUTRYOLSDH   YMKAGRXEIO   GZPRKAESOY   WHTOXZGDMA   TDEHBXMIWS.

85.  By SOUR PUSS.

OYESK   PACHYDERMS   AOPFL   UXFD   MHZOY   XFBR   PLMBS   OZPL. 
ZUFPLBAGH   LBYCF   QZDYPX   YDLM   GZQFBD   ADLYJ   RZUD.

86.  By LIVEDEVIL.

PREVIOUSLY   BDACL   YOEL   YFOCG,   FLHCY,   EHJJPOVLB   GHKRCL, 
UCOFMJ   APCR   EONQ   MOIQCHBAPJ.

87.  By NEOTERIC.

RXUGUZLQTVFR,   CNSQRLQTVFR   OTDALN   RB   MVFTQQRX   QSTQ. 
TFXUTSLCGSFZJ   FTVXLVQNZ   FTOSQ   GUFLVOU   DRTQDRX   TRF.

88.  By ZERO.

KROLGDB   FURZGV   ZDWFK   BRXWKV   VSULQW   DORQJ   GLUW   WUDFN. 
VZDUWKB   FXEDQ   MXQLRU   MXELODQWOB   ZLQV.

89.  By JOKEL.

JPLX   VUNKOM   MLKDUB   FUGHVP   VKHCX   VUPD   FWHMVP;  LQUMDPBV, 
VWJKPLMNB;  ULKFUGIKB,   QKDHGP;  VUXPLCMJ,   AMJPVUD.

90.  By LEE ANDER.

CLOUDY   BERG-SLHVEC   BECTR,   UI   BECT,   FVRAKMY   MGRAK-HVEC 
BUDNR-VRGL   BUZCLI   EY   BDAAEDA.   NEKYDNLC;  GEESE   PUNFUY; 
BETT   ESTDNLC.

91.  By TRYIT.

LSYKCTLSTRYITAB,   MCDSLMLE,   ZSRBWLX   IUOLSC   UWLAC   BMTUZYLAB 
YRUYHU   GTKVBC   KPMDSCASWUWVD   PLANKX   UCLM   WSKCHBXU   WVUBCB 
VUITSRPLBD   STUMBLER   JSLP   BHLMDVXU.

92.  By DIZZY.

ABCDEFG,   DZEIBJK   LMFDBCN,   MNTLYEA   PRZBGSF   TSBIURP 
IECLSBJ,   UKFIZBS,   PNFLARB;  EVLKZRO   PWELMBK   VTXPLNZ 
TPXOBZG.

93.  By ZANYCODAB.

ODZNERITFNM   VNDRR   BNOFDSK   PNIODRHE   EVMCDTIS   EVANZTOS 
FNQRZO   HCRI   PVEOHE.   RZROHIK,   URFRES   CNISLVZTF   AZSBE 
HGAZNLS.   QNCTK   OZRUNI   ASFRGSE   GTERLVITEO.

94.  By I. D. CIPHER.

JBMDVKJVMBTD   AWTHVQBLTQV   VGLBQWFXH   FXBJWTHVQNM   VCWYBLGX. 
BDGWCDWKZ,   DKWYFWKMB   RNMBJCDPCY,   GZCBQWFDP.

95.  By NEON.

CDFGH,   JHKLM   NPQLR,   SDTVW   XMZDW   PATVF   LRXBV   CDTWE 
QRIGH.   TKHFO   XRDIP   NHILW   EFDQL,   JMUVW   MRPES,   VHFAW 
NRAPW.

96.  By TWISTO.

FJKXZA,   ETXZQ,   ZCHUQP   QPZUF,   ZLLKUPTW   QBTJPZ   EDGN, 
PQZM   BTJMN   QPZDU,   MTUIWXJ   ZXGJUW   ZPFEWU   DUQBTW 
IBTQUWHJX.

97.  By NUMERO.

BCBDBEBFC   GHIBEK   UGVBQW   BRWPF   OPFQR   STDGPBQ -- EFHIKA 
YBQWYTZW   BLGUGZR   LKFQCGZUZGTHCYKZI.

98.  By WHIZZ BANG.

PGZPAPBPGZP?   AZFHIDEPXOA   AFISTP   YOEN   BPYC   PBFISX   PJDOBK 
PKLPOT.  BWXDYOPA   AFEYWI   LOIN   BFKTDEOP   TWRI   WFDI.   BWLF 
BLPZR   ESPAD   HZDJOBWK   ZWHPKI.

99.  By INVICTUS.

PDOKX   ZEVR   MOLTA.   MPNDR-NEX   NPKWTM   FACHX   PSGTLUR 
PGPGEVU   CPUFAD.   CZBPAQEUTCV   TAMR   TAOLPG   BPVUC.  HAEUWD 
KONRUYC   RBENZCMR   MVEYOR.




CHAPTER XI
Simple Substitution with Complexities

Concerning the numberless variations and complications which have
been applied to the simple substitution cipher, our discussion here
will have to be along general lines, with perhaps a brief mention of
some analytical principle. Decryptment, for the most part, involves
no principles other than those already discussed, and can only be
demonstrated on very long texts. All such ciphers, however, will
yield readily to the “probable word method,” and the student, in
considering each case, should not lose sight of the one method which
applies equally to all.

If the _probable word_ is a pattern word, so much the better; but
_every word carries a pattern in the normal frequencies of its
letters_. For instance, the word CIPHER, considered in relation to a
text of 100 letters, has, roughly, the frequency-pattern
3-7-2-5-12-6; or, considered in relation to a 200-letter text, a
pattern which is approximately double the first: 6-14-4-10-24-12.
A cryptogram supposed to contain this word may be prepared as
recommended in Chapter IX, with a frequency-figure written above
each letter. The frequency-pattern of the word CIPHER, based on
approximately the same amount of text, may then be written on a slip
of paper and passed along below the frequency-figures shown for
cryptogram-letters, in the hope of finding points at which the two
sets of figures are, to some extent, alike. Wherever such points can
be found, the suspected word can be assumed to be present there. So
long as the method remains that of simple substitution, any
substitutes which can be found in this way can have no other
originals than those first determined; thus, their substitution
throughout the cryptogram will serve to bring out other possibilities.

For the multiple-substitute cases, that is, those cases in which all
or part of the letters may have more than one substitute, the
frequencies of such letters as _I_, _H_, _E_, _R_, may be left blank
(or cut in half, dependent upon just what the cipher is), and only
the frequencies of _C_ and _P_, standing two positions apart, need
be considered. Particularly helpful, in this case, would be a
probable word such as CRYPTOGRAM, in which five infrequent letters
are standing at known distances apart. The frequency-pattern of this
word, based on 100, can be expressed roughly as _3 - 2 2 - - 2 - - 2_,
and the attempt made to find points in the cryptogram at which five
letters of somewhat these frequencies are standing at the given
intervals apart. The foregoing is based on the supposition that while
the encipherer, having several substitutes per letter, will be able
to conceal the true frequencies of his high-frequency letters, _there
is not much that he can do toward concealing his low frequencies_. He
can, of course, produce any frequencies that he likes by swamping his
text with nulls; and this, in the hands of a clever operator, can be
very effective, especially if the circumstances are such that he can
keep his method a secret. But for the average practical purpose, the
time consumed in the encipherment, and the increased length of the
cryptograms, are highly undesirable features, especially if it be
kept in mind that there are many other ciphers than simple
substitution. As to attack by analytical methods, the one device
which is more likely than any other to prove applicable in all cases
is the preparation of a digram count of exactly the kind we saw in
Fig. 68. Such a chart will afford the means for studying carefully
the _contacts_ of any given letter; just what its _variety_ seems to
be; whether or not this seems disproportionate to its apparent
frequency; whether or not it shows a tendency to touch letters of
lower frequency, or to be present in reversals; and so on.

Many of these ciphers, however, make use of two letters to represent
one. With these, it is the single-letter frequency count which is
best made on a chart. That is, the cryptogram is first marked off
into its pairs, and these pairs are counted in the same way as that
described for digrams. But digrams, in this case, will be represented
by four letters, and usually the number of different pairs is so
large that the examination of digrams will have to be done by
listing. For any cipher whatever in which the substitutes are
two-digit numbers, a frequency count taken in chart form is usually
far more convenient than one made by listing the numbers in advance.
With only the ten digits, the 100 cells can be made larger than the
676 cells needed for letters, and the chart still be small and
compact. The pairs of digits would be counted in exactly the same
way as so many digrams. With numbers, it is sometimes possible to
take the subsequent digram count, also, on a chart. Solution, in
many cases, involves pure guess-work. The decryptor, perhaps, has
begun his examination by testing his cryptogram for some variation
of the “Caesar” encipherment. He has counted the first hundred or
so of his letters, and has discovered that his frequency count is
not going to be that of an ordinary simple substitution; that is,
it is evidently not going to be one which he would be able to mark
off into sections of high, medium, and low frequencies (usually with
several letters missing), which would certainly be the case had each
plaintext letter been replaced always with a given substitute
throughout the cryptogram. Perhaps he has then marked his cryptogram
into pairs of numbers or letters, and finds that these, also, are
not likely to furnish the kind of frequency count which betrays
simple substitution or some other cipher with which he is familiar.
At this point, he is likely to pause and consider the source of the
cryptogram. Is this the work of an expert, or the work of an amateur?
Is it worthwhile to make up the statistics? Or shall I try for some
one of the novelties which I have met many times before?

One device which is particularly popular with amateurs is that of
assigning to each letter the numerical value which represents its
serial position in the normal (or reversed) alphabet, _A_ having the
value 1, _B_ the value 2, and so on, and afterward representing each
plaintext letter with two (or more) others which will express some
arithmetical process. For instance, the letter _C_ (value 3) might,
in some one of these systems, have the substitute _AB_ (1 plus 2),
or the substitute _DA_ (4 minus 1), or the substitute _YD_ (25 plus
4 equals 29; and 29 minus 26 equals 3); and so on to infinity.

Other simple devices, hardly worth calling ciphers, which have been
used in the columns of _The Cryptogram_ under the title “Simple
Substitution with Frills,” have included: (1) The use of false word
divisions. (2) The simple reversal of an otherwise unmanipulated
cryptogram. (3) The use of two given digrams, placed alternately at
the ends of words. (4) The use of a new cipher alphabet for each new
sentence. The first of these, of course, should have been suspected
after examination of the apparent terminal letters. The second,
theoretically, ought to be spotted if the method of solution includes
a close investigation of digrams. As to the third device, any two
digrams, used in the manner described, will attain impossible
percentages; our leading digram, _TH_, in normal text, remains fairly
close to three or four percent. It was the fourth device, however,
which caused the greatest consternation among the younger solvers;
in this case, the making of the frequency count will show what the
trouble is: It begins very well, with the expected resemblance to a
normal count, and suddenly begins to grow erratic.

Not every variation encountered in dealing with simple substitution
is employed with the deliberate intention of creating difficulties.
Those correspondents, for instance, who select some one letter, as
_X_, and place it after each word as a word-separator, do so because
they find it difficult to read their texts unless the word-divisions
are present. As to whether or not this device does actually create
difficulties: The person who is content to make use of simple
substitution as his means of secret communication, is not usually
inspired to employ more than one such letter. The length of an
English word being somewhat shorter than five letters, any single
letter placed religiously after each word will attain a frequency
(based on the new length) of not less than 18%, where the letter
_E_, at its very maximum, can rarely attain 15%. The decryptor,
taking his preliminary frequency count, quickly discovers this one
letter of enormous frequency. He might suspect German, or even
French, and look for other characteristics of those languages. But
having reason to believe that the language is English, he recognizes
this letter instantly for what it is; he first makes sure that it is
distributed throughout the cryptogram at an average interval of five
or six letters, then calmly circles it out and deals with a case of
word-divisions.


              Figure 76

  "Alphabet" for Encipherment of Numbers

  "Plaintext" ..     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
   "CIPHER"  ...     A B C D E F G H I J

       Text ready for encipherment:

          WE  HAVE  WCBEW  BALES.


Considering something of a more practical nature, there is another
very common device, used with every conceivable kind of cipher, which
is not in the least intended for the purpose of creating difficulties,
yet invariably does in short cryptograms. The ordinary practice, when
dealing with numbers, necessary punctuation marks, and so on, is to
write these out in words: _three hundred twenty five_; _quote_;
_dollars_. But where a given correspondence is likely to involve a
great many of these, so that the ordinary practice is very wasteful,
the encipherer is nearly always provided with a little “cipher
alphabet” of the general kind indicated in Fig. 76, in which the ten
digits, any desired punctuation marks, and any other needed symbols
($, %, @) have each a single substitute. In the “alphabet” of the
figure, the number 325 will be enciphered _CBE_. But if this
enciphered group _CBE_ is always to be cleanly distinguishable from
the rest of the text, a means must be found for making this
distinction, and this is usually done by reserving some one letter
to act solely as an _indicator_ and never using this letter for any
other purpose. This indicator-letter, as _W_, may then be placed at
the beginning and end of the enciphered group _CBE_, and the
resulting group, _WCBEW_, may be placed in the plaintext message,
ready to receive whatever kind of encipherment is given to the rest
of the letters. These groups, used in short cryptograms, can give
about the same amount of trouble as would so many nulls. But where
cryptograms are longer, with a great many such groups, the decryptor
invariably spots them by means of the recurrent indicator. Sometimes
one letter is used, and sometimes two (_W_. . ._W_, or _K_. . ._W_);
but in either case, the indicator always appears as a pair of
correlatives, and wherever the first of the pair is found, its
companion is never far away. Some provision must, of course, be made
for replacing the indicator letter in the plaintext alphabet. In
English, we ordinarily select _J_ for any such omission; this is a
letter which is rarely used, and, on those scattered occasions when
it does occur, it can be replaced with _I_. Among the Latins, it is
commoner to make use of _K_ and _W_; these two letters are not used
at all in their native languages, and can be replaced, respectively,
with _Q_ and _VV_. It is also possible to omit _X_, replacing it with
_KS_, or _V_, replacing it with _U_. The fact that it is possible to
shorten the message alphabet without appreciably impairing the
clearness of its messages has given rise to what is probably the most
practical of the simple substitution variations: two or three
letters, as _J_, _K_, _V_, are omitted from the plaintext alphabet,
while the cipher alphabet retains its full 26, and in this way some
extra substitutes are provided which can be given to the more
frequent letters. It is possible to dispense with as many as five
letters, replacing _J_, _K_, _X_, _V_, _W_ with _I_, _Q_, _QS_, _U_,
_UU_, and assign the extra substitutes to _E_, _T_, _A_, _O_, _N_.
Fig. 77 illustrates an alphabet of this kind. Here, the letters _I J_
are to have the same substitute, and the letters _K Q_ are to have
the same substitute. This releases two extra substitutes which may
be given to _E_ and _T_.


                                   Figure 77

                               j q
  Plaintext:   a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p r s t u v w x y z E T
   CIPHER:     C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A

  Encipherment:
               w e m u s t h a v e b e t t e r c o v e r a g e ...
               H E T J M K Y C I B U E A K B N L Q I E N C Z B ...


The foregoing is one of those cases in which the decryptor can learn
a great deal by taking his frequency count in the form of a digram
chart. And he knows, of course, that his cryptogram contains some
two letters whose combined frequencies will reproduce the frequency
of _E_, or of _T_.

In Fig. 78, we have a “checkerboard” which, primarily, is intended as
a _transformation device_; that is, a means for replacing single
letters with syllables, and, consequently, for replacing five-letter
incoherent groups with ten-letter pronounceable groups; under the
European agreement, the price of transmission is the same for both,
and the pronounceable groups are less likely to result in
transmission errors. The alphabet is first reduced to 25 letters (in
this case by the omission of _X_), and is written into a 5 x 5 square.
The five vowels, written at one side, will then serve to designate
the five rows, while five other letters, written across the top, will
designate columns. Any letter found inside the square may thus be
pointed out by naming the two letters which will indicate its column
and row. In the given example, _A_ can be replaced with _EN_ or _NE_;
_T_ with _UL_ or _LU_, and so on.


                Figure 78

      L N R S T
                  b  a  t  t  a  l  i  o  n
  A   C U L P E   ER NE UL LU NE AR RI OR NO
  E   R A B D F
  I   G H I J K
  O   M N O Q S           Regrouped:
  U   T V W Y Z
                    ERNEULLUNE  ARRIORNO.


The fact that two interchangeable substitutes have been provided for
each letter of the alphabet has led many persons to use this device,
absolutely without modifications, as a simple substitution key. Yet
it must be plain that any decryptor, taking his preliminary frequency
count, will discover, before going very far, that this count is being
made on only ten different letters, and thus can represent only one
possible kind of encipherment. A frequency count taken on the pairs,
with no distinction made between a given digram and its reversal,
will afford the necessary proof; after that, the average decryptor
will usually replace the pairs with single letters (or numbers), just
as he would in dealing with printers’ symbols, or other inconvenient
characters. The checkerboards which are actually intended for
encipherment purposes ordinarily use digits for pointing out columns
and rows. Where the digits at the side are the same as those across
the top, it becomes necessary to observe an order, as column-row, or
row-column, and this, using only five digits, is ordinary simple
substitution, in which every letter has one substitute. But if the
five digits at the side are different from the five written across
the top, then the order is immaterial, and any number may be
interchangeable with its reversal; that is, 17 or 71 can represent
the same letter.

This encipherment might not be spotted so promptly as the case in
which only ten letters are present out of a possible 26. But if the
count is made on a chart, as recommended at the beginning of the
chapter, it is very readily detectible that there are two separate
groups of digits, _neither one of which has ever formed any
combination within itself_, every number in the cryptogram being
composed of one digit from each group. Thus we see plainly the trail
which is left by co-ordinates.


                                      Figure 79

                                The KEY-PHRASE Cipher

  (a)
     Plaintext:   a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
      CIPHER:     O N E W H O H A S P A S S E D O N I S A M O N G U S

  (b)
     CIPHER.......    O  M  S  S
     May represent:   A  U  I  I       Full
                      F     L  L       Fuss
                      P     M  M       Fuzz
                      V     S  S       Pull
                            Z  Z       Puss


Checkerboards, of course, can be used to better advantage. But,
before leaving the simple for the complex, we must not overlook the
celebrated _key-phrase cipher_, which discards the idea of multiple
substitutes in favor of multiple originals! This cipher, shown in
Fig. 79, is said to have been used for serious purposes. Its only
difference from the ordinary simple substitution lies in the nature
of the cipher alphabet, which must be a plaintext sentence, or phrase,
containing the necessary 26 letters. The mysterious pronouncement,
“One who has passed on is among us,” is the earliest example of which
the writer has any recollection; those of later years have been
largely proverbs, or other familiar sayings: “Journeys end in lovers’
meeting”; “Prosperity is just around the C.” As any cryptogram-letter
may have five or six different originals, it is readily understood
why the cryptograms of the key-phrase cipher are seldom seen without
their word-divisions; yet, curiously enough, their translations are
almost never ambiguous.

As to their decryptment, the student who cares to try the appended
example will find that it is hardly more difficult than one of the
simpler “aristocrats.” The method is about the same for both, keeping
in mind that the frequency shown by any cryptogram-letter is either
the frequency belonging to one letter or the exact sum of the
frequencies belonging to several. Here, however, the reconstruction
of the key simultaneously with the identification of substitutes is a
very important adjunct to solving; the cipher-alphabet, being pure
plaintext, can often be built up long in advance of solution. It
might be added that this cipher, with or without word-divisions, is
readily distinguished from all others by the make-up of its frequency
count, which, as a rule, consists chiefly of the high-frequency
letters in unusual numbers.

Passing now to the more difficult cases, we will glance at a few of
those ciphers which are truly multisubstitutional; that is, which
provide multiple substitutes for all or most of the plaintext letters.
This is usually accomplished by the use of two-digit numbers, of which
one hundred are possible: 01-02-03. . . . . .98-99-00. These one
hundred numbers may be assigned as substitutes to the twenty-six
letters, in proportions roughly approximate to their normal
frequencies, as suggested in Fig. 80; or most of them may be so
assigned, and the rest reserved as substitutes for digits,
punctuation, and so on. For security, however, they must never be
assigned in regular order, as in the figure, or even by any
methodical process, but absolutely in incoherent order. Thus, while
the form indicated in Fig. 80 will be convenient enough for
encipherment purposes, it is much less so for decipherment, and
ordinarily there will be two separate tables, the second of these
making it more convenient to find numbers. This _deciphering key_
can be prepared as a list, running in numerical order; but a much
more usual and convenient method is that of preparing it in the form
of a chart; that is, the ten digits are written across the top and
along one side of a 10 x 10 square, exactly as if making ready to
take a number-count, and the letters, or other characters, are then
distributed in the 100 cells so that the correct digits will serve as
co-ordinates for pointing them out. Such a key is changeable, but not
readily communicated and remembered without written documents; and to
overcome this very serious defect, many mnemonic devices have been
conceived, of which the following is perhaps the most practical:
Simply treat the one hundred numbers as if they were a plaintext
message, and encipher the series by any one of the irregular
transposition processes.


      Figure 80

  A   11, 12, 13, 14
  B   15
  C   16, 17
  D   18, 19
  E   20, 21, 22, 23, 24
  (Etc.)


The two commonest of the checkerboard keys are shown in Fig. 81. When
digits are used, as in (a), an order must be observed in reading the
two co-ordinates. The letter _L_, for instance, may have any one of
the substitutes 13, 18, 63, or 68, but may not also have their
reversals, since these, using the same order, row-column, would all
be substitutes for _G_. Using letters, however, it is possible to
have two entirely different series at top and side, as in (b); in
this case, no order need be observed, and the letter _L_ may have any
one of eight substitutes: _KE_, _KF_, _LE_, _LF_, _EK_, _FK_, _EL_,
or _FL_. By including the still unused letters _U V W X Y Z_, it can
be arranged to provide yet more substitutes for some of the letters.
For either of these cases, the external numbers or letters (preferably
in mixed order), could constitute a semi-fixed key — that is, one not
changed every day — while the mixed alphabet of the square could be
changed as often as desired. Innumerable other keys of this type are
found. For the most part, they are based on rectangles of 35, 36, or
40 cells, the extra cells being used for digits, or other desired
symbols, and especially for extra appearances of the more frequent
letters.


                     Figure 81

  (a)                         (b)
         1  2  3  4  5               A  C  E  G  I
         6  7  8  9  0               B  D  F  H  J

  1-6    C  U  L  P  E        K-L    C  U  L  P  E
  2-7    R  A  B  D  F        M-N    R  A  B  D  F
  3-8    G  H  I  J  K        O-P    G  H  I  J  K
  4-9    M  N  O  Q  S        Q-R    M  N  O  Q  S
  5-0    T  V  W  Y  Z        S-T    T  V  W  Y  Z


One such key, the Grandpré cipher shown in Fig. 82, uses 100 cells.
The filling of the square with ten ten-letter words provides letters
in somewhat the normal frequency proportions, and an eleventh
ten-letter word, composed of the ten initials, serves as a sort of
mnemonic device for stringing the first ten together. The words, of
course, must be chosen in such a way as to include all 26 of the
letters.

General Sacco, dealing with fractional substitutions (Chapter XXII),
shows the same idea in a checkerboard which he describes as
“frequential.” This square is simply filled with letters, used in
proportions roughly approximating their normal frequencies; for ready
finding, all repetitions of a letter are placed close together, but
filled in on diagonals, which, to some extent, will prevent their
being represented by consecutive numbers.


         Figure 82

    The GRANDPRÉ Cipher

      1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0
  1   E Q U A N I M I T Y
  2   X Y L O P H O N E S
  3   H A L F O P E N E D
  4   U N B L O C K I N G
  5   M O V A B I L I T Y
  6   A D J U R A T I O N
  7   T H E O R I Z I N G
  8   I G N O R A N T L Y
  9   O W N E R S H I P S
  0   N O V I T I A T E S


In Fig. 83, we have the checkerboard again, with a modification. If
the key used is exactly the one of the figure, those letters which
are standing on the first three rows may have twelve substitutes each,
and those which are standing on the fourth row may have eight. In all
of these cases, the substitute for any letter is a pair. But the final
row, including here the letters _V W X Y Z_, is not enciphered with a
pair of co-ordinates; each letter may represent itself, or each may
represent the one on its left or right, but in any case, the
substitute is a _single letter_. Thus we have cryptograms in which
most of the letters are represented by pairs, but a few are not. Such
words as _ever_, _you_, _with_, _when_, _by_, _have_, and so on, will
occasionally occur; or, if not, then the encipherer may insert a few
nulls at strategic points. Thus, the decryptor, taking his count
purely on pairs, is expected to take some of them correctly and
“straddle” the rest. Such a device is described by Givierge, also the
following similar device. The cipher alphabet consists only of
two-digit numbers, but includes no number coming from the 40’s. With
all of the 40’s omitted, a sequence 44 becomes impossible; and the
encipherer, having first prepared his cryptogram, looks it over, and,
here and there, inserts a digit 4 beside another digit 4, producing
the impossible sequence 44. The decipherer, wherever he sees this,
need merely erase one of the 4’s, and since the digits, in Morse,
have their own distinctive symbols, there is no great danger of
errors in transmission which the decipherer will be unable to
straighten out; but the decryptor, as before, is expected to
“straddle.” Concerning decryptment, in all of these cases, there is
little that we can say here except that, given sufficient material,
these ciphers can all be decrypted with comparatively little trouble.*
The “straddling” devices, perhaps, would represent the most difficult
case, presuming that the decryptor has no probable words and none of
the information which comes through espionage or from that even more
fertile source, the carelessness of the encipherer. In dealing with
one of these, the decryptor, who normally expects a certain amount
of uniformity in the frequency counts made from different portions
of a same cryptogram, is likely to find that his count is showing
altogether new substitutes, or the same substitutes with altogether
new frequencies. He suspects, then, that he may be “straddling”
between two pairs, and tries making his count _in sections_ until he
finally discovers what letters (or digit) are causing the trouble.

*For a clear and detailed exposition of the decryptment method
ordinarily used in multiple-substitute cases, see _Secret and Urgent_
(Bobbs-Merrill), page 64 et seq. For dictionary cipher and simple codes,
see _The Solution of Codes and Ciphers_, by Louis C. S. Mansfield
(Maclehose), page 56 et seq., or _Cryptography_ (Langie-Macbeth;
Dutton), page 88 et seq.

                Figure 83

          K L M N O
          F G H I J

  A-E-S   A B C D E   b  a  X t  t  a  l  i  o  n
  B-P-T   F G H I K   AG EF Y NR DI SK KU TI CN HQ
  C-Q-U   L M N O P         =
  D-R     Q R S T U
          V W X Y Z


The use of co-ordinates, in those cases where row and column are
interchangeable as to order, shows up very plainly when the
pair-count has been made on a chart; as previously mentioned for a
case of digits, the letters will divide automatically into two groups,
neither of which ever forms any combination within itself. With the
other case, where an order must be observed, there are not so many
substitutes per letter. But in either case, it is possible to _pair
the letters_ which belong together. Here, for instance, are the
letters _E_ and _F_. The frequent combinations of both _E_ and _F_
are always formed with the same letters; and both have avoided the
same letters; _these two must have been paired_. Their combinations
with _G_ and _H_ are much more frequent than their combinations with
_I_ and _J_; thus _G_ and _H_ must have been paired, and _I_ and _J_
must have been paired. This combination _EG_ (and its equivalents),
has been frequently followed by this other combination (and its
equivalents) and so on. When a great many pairs can be considered
equivalent to one another, it is possible to begin setting up the
checkerboard. Some such devices, of course, are safer than others.
But the mere fact that they double the lengths of the cryptograms
renders them unfit for any purpose where speed is a requirement; nor
can the added time and expense of transmission be tolerated for any
purpose whatever unless there is some very definite gain in secrecy.


                                     Figure 84

                             An Example of BOOK CIPHER

  4-1   1-5   3-16   4-11   1-3   1-6   2-2   6-21   1-4   3-2   4-25   4-2

  3-3   l-l   2-12   5-22   4-10   6-7   6-2   5-6   5-7   2-7   1-2   1-8

  6-1   3-7   5-4   3-6.
                                 (Key "volume":   23d Psalm).


One great objection to any device offering optional substitutes is
that the encipherer himself seems unable to take full advantage of
his system. Even having at his disposal five different substitutes
for _E_, he falls into the habit of using one of these in preference
to the other four; or, determined to avoid this, he uses them
meticulously according to rotation, so that when a frequency chart is
prepared from his cryptograms, this chart, which is, after all, a
_graph_, will show the five uniform frequencies sticking out like a
sore thumb. Even _book cipher_, notably secure, however unwieldy in
use, has been decrypted because of the encipherer’s very human
tendency to use a substitute more than once rather than search for a
new one among the hundreds at his disposal.

In book cipher, any agreed book, or other written or printed document,
will serve as a _key-volume_, so long as it is one that is sure to be
at hand when wanted. Words, or letters, can then be represented by a
series of numbers usually indicating: page, (column), line, serial
position. One letter or one word may thus have a substitute such as
20-1-4-32. An example is provided in Fig. 84, which the interested
student may puzzle out for himself. The particular key-volume was
issued in 1848, but we think this should cause no trouble. When the
key-volume selected happens to be the ordinary dictionary, identically
the same cipher becomes known as _dictionary cipher_, which is, to all
intents and purposes, a very insecure form of _code_. Perhaps the two
names together, book cipher and dictionary cipher, might be said to
represent the maximum and minimum degree of safety found in the code
family.

We leave undiscussed the subject of those alphabets which are based
on phonetics, with digraphs _TH_, _SH_, _CH_, having their individual
symbols, and each vowel capable of having several. The student who
desires to prepare one may find the necessary suggestions in any
shorthand manual; his substitutes can be two-digit numbers, and his
encipherment may be any one of those intended for the normal alphabet.
Having made mention of several processes which, to the younger student,
may present frightening possibilities, we hasten to add that the four
appended examples are all of a type which he should be able to solve
without a great deal of difficulty.


100.  By PICCOLA.  (Key-Phrase Cipher - intercepted by a "Royalist" spy).

N H H K O   H W A   E H M A   U I   H U U H S T   U S A   S T U N   H U
M H N I W A H T.     N H H H S A   D T H H   I A   I I E I A M   H K M
U W A H O L W N   W H T M A M   D S T H A   J T E S U   T O   T K
N W I E W A O O.     O U H K M   W A H M N   U I   H U U H S T   N W T O I K
H K M   W A H A H O A   N W T O I K A W O.

101.  By PICCOLA.  (Probable words:  CIPHER,  SUBSTITUTION,  ALPHABET,  etc).

D K I U O   C Z P V C   L U Z I Q   U W Y V B   V I N C D   U U L C U   K U Z I I
U O C Z P   V C L U Z   P Y N U S   Q S C Z I   U L Q T U   K H I C Z   I K L U Z
P Y N N Y   J Q Y L U   P L U Z I   Q J S C U   L U S U E   Y G U Z I   Q I U T Q
N U F S U   Z F L U I   C V F Q S   W Q I I S   U Y S U G   S Q N B L   U G U O V
V Y F S Q   Y I H I Y   I K O H K   U V P T Y   K Q I J U   Y V P P C   E S Y U O
F Q S U L   C Z N Y Z   F K E S Y   Z I U Z I   R Q V V C.

102.  By PICCOLA.  (Probable words:  COLLECTION,  GALLERIES,  FIGURINE, etc).

Y C G U T   H M P Y B   X S K R M   G X U F P   C M I B C   J G R M K   X L X S Z
N Q V V U   N I X Q S   Q E E X Z   H M X S R   L E Q M L   C V U D Y   C G R N Q
S E X J U   S K X C V   X S E Q M   T C I X Q   S K Y C I   I Y R K C   S C Z M C
L I Q V U   S E M Q T   K Y R T Q   M Z C S Z   C V V U M   X R L F C   L L U R S
M U N R S   I V B X S   C N U M K   C X S W H   C M I R M   D Y C L L   X S N U J
X L C P P   R C M U J   D T C B O   R X S K Y   X L E U V   V Q F L N   Q V V R N
I X Q S S   Q F X X X.

103.  By EFSEE.  (Probable words:  PEOPLE,  PERSON,  CIRCUMSTANCES, etc).

B E C O M   I C I Q U   E X P A Y   O T I A N   S I Z I P   I A N D O   A B U M Y
O R E A N   U S Q U I   M O N I P   M A M A M   I F O X E   G A O K A   Z U K I S
G O V I X   A W A Z A   I T H I N   A I L M O   S U I S H   E A T R U   A L E M O
F A T I C   A G I D O   Y E M B E   Y O L E N   A C O S E   K E E L S   O G I Z A
C O O L S   I D I O R   Q U A Z O   W A G E S   D I B U S   I V I P U   A Z A M E
S I D A R   T A C O O   Y A P E S   L I A R S   E W O A L   O N I K O   L O M B A
R I L A Z   A L O W I   A V U M A   K A T L O   F I C I N   A I M I L   N A Q U I
M O N I P   S A W O G   A P A V I   H I S U E   C A N O S   M O L E T   A M E K O
W A I V S   I A R T E   Z E I R S   I L A Z E   G A S A M   I V E E P.




CHAPTER XII
Multiple-Alphabet Ciphers — The Vigenère

The theory of polyalphabetical substitution is as follows: The
encipherer has at his disposal several simple substitution alphabets,
usually 26. He uses one such alphabet to encipher only one letter;
for the next letter, he may use another cipher alphabet; for the
third letter, a third alphabet; and so on, until some preconcerted
plan has been followed out. The earliest known ciphers of this kind,
the Porta (1563) and the Vigenère (1586), made use of a chart, or
_tableau_, on which all of the available cipher alphabets were
written out in full one below another. The Gronsfeld cipher (1655)
used a purely mental encipherment plan; but the Beaufort ciphers,
arriving two hundred years later (1857), again made use of a tableau,
and something of the same idea survives in the use of _strips_; that
is, a set of long narrow cards, each card carrying a simple
substitution key. Slides, however, must have been in use near the
time of Beaufort, since the best-known of the slide-ciphers, the
Saint-Cyr, was being taught in 1880 at the French military school
from which it takes its name. As to cipher disks, these appear to
have been known even in Porta’s time, and have passed through many
complications, though it has not been a great many years since a very
simple disk was in use in our own army. (A drawing of the United
States Army Cipher Disk may be seen in Webster’s New International
Dictionary.)

To know thoroughly any one of these ciphers is to understand the
fundamental principles of all, and we are going to base our studies
chiefly upon the Vigenère, most perfect of the simpler types, and the
basis upon which others have been founded. Fig. 85 shows, in full,
the Vigenère tableau, or “alphabet square.” The alphabet standing
horizontally across the top of this figure is the plaintext alphabet,
and serves for the whole tableau. Below this, and parallel to it, are
the 26 “Caesar” alphabets, the first one being a duplicate of the
plaintext alphabet, while the remaining 25 have been _shifted_, one
letter at a time, until the last one begins with _Z_. These are the
26 available cipher alphabets, and each one is named according to its
first letter, which is also spoken of as its _key_. Thus, the
key-letter _A_ points out the _A_-alphabet; the key-letter _B_ points
out the _B_-alphabet, and so on. The alphabet standing vertically on
the left side of the tableau is merely a list of these key-letters,
and so is called the key-alphabet. Except where cipher machines are
employed, the ordinary plan of encipherment does not make use of the
full 26 available cipher alphabets; only a few of these are used, and
these few are taken always in a given rotation, so that the cipher
becomes _periodic_. If the rotation includes, say, twelve of the
cipher alphabets (whether or not these are all different), the
cryptograms are said to have a _period of 12_. (The word “cycle” is
also used in this connection.) Since each letter of the normal
alphabet is the key to one of the Vigenère cipher alphabets, the
encipherer, wishing to make use of several different cipher alphabets,
is able to remember their sequence by means of a key-word, in which
each letter will point out one particular cipher alphabet. If today’s
key-word is BED, only three cipher alphabets will be used, the
_B_-alphabet, the _E_-alphabet, and the _D_-alphabet, and the
cryptograms will all have a _period of 3_. But if, tomorrow, the
key-word is changed to CONSTANTINOPLE, the complete rotation will
include fourteen alphabets, and the cryptograms will have a
_period of 14_.


                          Figure 85

                    THE VIGENÈRE TABLEAU


      A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

  A   A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  B   B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A
  C   C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B
  D   D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C
  E   E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D
  F   F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E
  G   G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F
  H   H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G
  I   I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H
  J   J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I
  K   K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J
  L   L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K
  M   M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L
  N   N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M
  O   O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N
  P   P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O
  Q   Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P
  R   R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q
  S   S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R
  T   T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S
  U   U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T
  V   V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U
  W   W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V
  X   X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W
  Y   Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
  Z   Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y


To make use of a cipher alphabet, say the _B_-alphabet, we may lay a
ruler across the tableau in such a way that this one alphabet is
pointed out. Then, to encipher any letter, as _S_, we may find this
letter, _S_, in the plaintext alphabet at the top, and trace down its
column as far as the _B_-alphabet which is being pointed out by the
ruler; we find that the substitute, in this alphabet, is _T_. Or,
wishing to decipher _T_, we find this letter in the _B_-alphabet and
trace upward to the plaintext alphabet in order to find that its
original is _S_. While the foregoing explains the principle, it has
not been expressed in the usual language. Where we have mentioned the
use of the _B_-alphabet, it is much commoner to hear that a certain
letter has been enciphered or deciphered “with key-letter _B_,” and
the usual description of the encipherment will be somewhat as follows:
To encipher _S_ by _B_, find _S_ in the plaintext alphabet, find _B_
in the key-alphabet, and use the substitute which is found at the
intersection of the _S_-column with the _B_-row. Or: To decipher _T_
by _B_, first find the key-letter _B_, trace horizontally to the
right as far as the cipher-letter _T_, then trace upward to its
original, _S_. This, we believe, is the original description, as
explained by Blaise de Vigenère himself, and the original encipherment
plan was that indicated in Fig. 86. The message of this figure is
SEND SUPPLIES TO MORLEY’S STATION. The key-word, BED, has been
repeated often enough to pair one key-letter with each text-letter,
and these pairs are handled _one at a time_: _S_ is enciphered by
_B_, _E_ is enciphered by _E_, _N_ is enciphered by _D_, and so on,
following the original description.


                                     Figure 86

                      Original Method of VIGENÈRE Encipherment

  Key:      B E D B   E D B E D B E D   B E   D B E D B E D   B E D B E D B
  Message:  S E N D   S U P P L I E S   T O   M O R L E Y S   S T A T I O N
  Cipher:   T I Q E   W X Q T O J I V   U S   P P V O F C V   T X D U M R O


                                  Figure 87

                             Modern Enciphernent

                         B E D       B E D       B E D

                         S E N       D S U       P P L
                         T I Q       E W X       Q T O

                         I E S       T O M       O R L
                         J I V       U S P       P V O

                         E Y S       S T A       T I O
                         F C V       T X D       U M R

                         N
                         O

          5          10          15          20          25          30
  T I Q E W   X Q T O J   I V U S P   P V O F C   V T X D U   M R O X X


The modern method would be that of Fig. 87. Knowing that a great many
letters are going to be enciphered by _B_, a great many others by _E_,
and a great many others by _D_, and having no wish to preserve
word-divisions, we begin by writing our plaintext into three columns
(or by grouping it conveniently), and then encipher at a single
writing all of those letters which are to be enciphered by any one
same key-letter. That is, we apply one cipher alphabet at a time, as
first explained. The modern practice will also require that the
cryptogram be taken off in five-letter groups, and that the final
group be made complete. This is another of those cases in which the
decryptor will number his letters, as shown in the figure. The student
who has not previously met the Vigenère cipher is urged to perform the
two operations of encipherment and decipherment and thus familiarize
himself with the use of a tableau; it is possible that in most of his
subsequent reading he will find explanations based on the “columns”
and “rows” of a “tableau,” when, as a matter of fact, no tableau has
been used. To understand how this might be, suppose we take a look
now at the Saint-Cyr cipher.


                                 Figure 88

                            THE SAINT-CYR SLIDE

          ┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
          │ A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z │
  ┌───────┴┬───────────────────────────────────────────────────┬┴────────────
  │ A B C D│E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D│E F G H I J..\
  └───────┬┴───────────────────────────────────────────────────┴┬─────────────┘
          └─────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘     (To Y.)


In Fig. 88, we have the principle of the sliding device by means of
which this encipherment is accomplished. The Saint-Cyr slide is very
easily prepared of cardboard, or of any other flexible and fairly
strong material, but may also be prepared of wood, or may be set up
for any temporary purpose on two strips of paper. Its details, also,
may be varied to suit the operator’s own convenience. As shown,
however, the upper and single alphabet, which is the plaintext one,
is written on a card, and slots will be cut in this card at two
points: Just below and to the left of _A_; and just below and to the
right of _Z_. This plaintext alphabet is considered stationary.
The lower and double alphabet, which is to furnish all of the
substitutes, is written on a long narrow strip, the two ends of which
may be inserted into the slots of the other card. This strip, or
slide, may then be moved back and forth at will. However prepared,
the spacing must be uniform throughout both alphabets. The Saint-Cyr
cipher also makes use of a key-word in which each letter is the key
to a cipher alphabet, and which is applied exactly as in Fig. 86 or
Fig. 87. To apply the key-letter _B_, we adjust the slide in such a
way that the _B_ of the sliding alphabet will stand directly beneath
_A_ of the stationary one. This gives us exactly the same set-up
which we used in Chapter IX for cases of simple substitution; that
is, we have a plaintext alphabet with a cipher alphabet standing just
below it; each plaintext letter is standing directly above its
substitute, and each substitute directly beneath its original. The
cipher alphabet just referred to, in which key-letter _B_, found in
the sliding alphabet, is standing directly below the index-letter,
_A_, found in the stationary alphabet, is identical with the
_B_-alphabet of the Vigenère tableau, and is even called by the same
name. Should we move the sliding alphabet, so as to place key-letter
_C_ directly beneath index-letter _A_, we reproduce the _C_-alphabet
of the Vigenère cipher, again called by the same name. In the figure,
we have the _E_-alphabet in position, with key-letter _E_ standing
directly beneath index-letter _A_. And since the sliding alphabet may
be placed in 26 different positions, each time reproducing one of the
Vigenère cipher alphabets, having the same key and the same name, it
appears that our Saint-Cyr “cipher” is merely a duplication of the
Vigenère. The chances are, then, that even though we call our cipher
by its original name, and even make references to its tableau, our
actual work of encipherment and decipherment will have been
accomplished by means of the more convenient and rapid Saint-Cyr
slide. But where a slide is possible, a _cipher disk_ is also
possible, and many will prefer to use the disk.

To prepare one of these, we might proceed as follows: First, cut out
from cardboard (or other desired material) a pair of disks, one
smaller than the other. Divide the peripheries of both disks into 26
equal segments, and write the 26 letters of the alphabet in a circle
around both of the peripheries, causing both alphabets to run in the
same direction. Place the smaller disk on top of the larger; and,
finally, stick a drawing pin through the exact center of both disks,
to serve as a pivot. The smaller disk may now be rotated to 26
different positions, so that any desired key-letter can be caused to
stand beside index-letter _A_ of the outer disk, and will place in
position the cipher alphabet of which it is the key. The use of this
revolving alphabet in place of a sliding one does away with the
necessity for doubling its length.

Now let us examine carefully Fig. 89, with its two examples of
decipherment. At (a) of this figure, a short cryptogram fragment,
beginning _T I Q_. . . . , is being deciphered with the original
key-word, BED, and is bringing out the message, SEND
SUPPLIES. . . . . This, of course, is to be expected of any cipher.
But at (b), it is this _message fragment_, SEND SUPPLIES, which is
acting as a _trial key_; exactly the same process is being used as if
applying the true key, and this decipherment is bringing out the
original key, repeating over and over. The Vigenère cipher, then,
works equally well in reverse, and in this respect it differs from
some of its kindred ciphers. To understand this peculiarity, we have
merely to consider the tableau. Concerning this we have said that the
horizontal alphabet which stands across the top is the plaintext
alphabet, and that the vertical one at the left is merely a list of
keys. Suppose we decide to look at it the other way round, and say
that the vertical alphabet at the left is the plaintext one, and that
all 26 of the cipher alphabets are standing on end with their
key-letters at the top, so that the horizontal alphabet, written
across the top, is merely a list of these keys. Will there be any
difference in the encipherment? Might the slide, also, be prepared in
a vertical position? Does it make any difference in the results
whether we encipher plaintext _SEN_ by key BED, or encipher plaintext
BED by key _SEN_?

One road to decryptment, then, is clearly indicated. If we have a
probable word, we may use this word exactly as if it were the key,
and, if it is actually present, it will bring out the true key. Or,
if we have no probable word, we may try probable sequences, or make
use of the trigram list. Here, however, we have two separate cases:
The simplest, in which the probable word is long enough to bring out
the key-word _repeating_; and the most difficult, in which the
sequence, or probable word, is very short, and will bring out only a
short fragment of the key-word.


                                    Figure 89

  (a)  Deciphering with the KEY:

               Key:          B  E  D  B  E  D  B  E  D  B  E  D.......
               CRYPTOGRAM:   T  I  Q  E  W  X  Q  T  O  J  I  V.......
               Plaintext:    S  E  N  D  S  U  P  P  L  I  E  S.......

  (b)  Deciphering with the MESSAGE:

               Trial Key:    S  E  N  D  S  U  P  P  L  I  E  S.......
               CRYPTOGRAM:   T  I  Q  E  W  X  Q  T  O  J  I  V.......
               True Key:     B  E  D  B  E  D  B  E  D  B  E  D.......


The simpler case is readily explained. We have, say, a cryptogram
beginning _U S Z H L W D B P B G G F S_. . . , in which we suspect
the presence of the word SUPPLIES. We decipher the first eight
letters, _using this probable word as a trial_ _key_, and obtain a
jumbled series of letters _C Y K S A O Z J_, which is not satisfactory.
We leave off the first cryptogram-letter, _U_, and decipher the next
eight, obtaining another jumbled series of letters _A F S W L V X X_.
We start again at the third letter, then at the fourth letter, and
still there is no information. But at the fifth trial, beginning at
the fifth cryptogram-letter, we obtain a series _T C O M E T C O_,
and this is satisfactory, not necessarily because we have recognized
the word COMET, though this, of course, is a very desirable happening,
but because the last three letters, _T C O_, are repeating the first
three. _The series is beginning over_. The student should practice
doing this, using both the tableau and the slide (or disk), until he
is sure that he understands the process. The exact details of his
work are immaterial; if he is sure that his key will be a recognizable
word, it will be satisfactory to make decipherments directly on the
cryptogram, erasing as he goes. Sometimes, however, the key is
incoherent, or apparently so, and a jumbled series like
_C Y K S A O Z J_ might actually be the correct key; for this reason,
it is well to follow a routine of some kind which will preserve all
of the decipherments. One such plan is illustrated in Fig. 90.

Here, the cryptogram, or a substantial portion of it, would be
written across a sheet of quadrille paper, and the probable word
would be written at one side, where each of its letters will govern
one row of decipherments. The first letter, _S_ in the figure, has
been used to _decipher the whole row of cryptogram-letters_, giving
every possible key-letter which can produce _S_. The second letter,
_U_, has been used to decipher them all again (except the very first
letter; we do not expect a word UPPLIES). The third letter, _P_, has
been used to decipher them all a third time; and soon. The resulting
rows of decipherment include all key-letters which could have produced
_S_, then _U_, then _P_, and so on. To read them consecutively,
beginning at any cryptogram letter, start immediately below that
letter, and read diagonally downward to the right. The first diagonal
gives key _CYK_. . . , the second gives _AFS_. . . , and so on to the
fifth diagonal, showing the key as _T C O M E T C O_. (If it is
desired that these possible keys should come out standing in a
horizontal position, then the _decipherments_ may be made diagonally.)
F. R. Carter, the originator of this scheme, does not necessarily
make all of the decipherments which are included in the figure. He
begins with the assumption that his key will be a recognizable word;
having deciphered in full the first three rows, he abandons all of
those diagonals which cannot develop into words. If, in the end, he
is forced to conclude that his key was incoherent, _no decipherments
have been erased_; he may still go back and develop the rest of his
diagonals, in the hope that one will begin repeating.


                                     Figure 90

            Deciphering with the Probable Word SUPPLIES - Routine of F.R.CARTER

  Cryptogram fragment: ....  U  S  Z  H  L  W  D  B  P  B  G  G  F  S  .........

  Probable word:   S         C  A  H  P  T/ E  L  J  X  J  O  O  N  A  .........
                   U            Y  F  N  R  C/ J  H  V  H  M  M  L  Y  .........
                   P               K  S  W  H  O/ M  A  M  R  R  Q  D  .........
                   P                  S  W  H  O  M/ A  M  R  R  Q  D  .........
                   L                     A  L  S  Q  E/ Q  V  V  U  H  .........
                   I                        O  V  T  H  T//Y  Y  X  K  .........
                   E                           Z  X  L  X  C//C  B  O  .........
                   S                                          O//
                                                                    (Key: COMET)


The more difficult of our two cases, that in which we have no probable
words other than _the_, _and_, _which_, _that_, _have_, _but_, etc.,
can follow exactly the routine outlined in Fig. 90; but in this case
there must be two separate work-sheets. Here, it is usually better to
forget words and start at once with the list of normally frequent
trigrams, _THE_, _AND_, _THA_, _ENT_, _ION_, _TIO_, etc. The
key-fragments which are deciphered by these will be very short, and
very numerous; a great many of them will be very good usable
sequences, and perhaps the correct key-sequence will not look quite
so inviting as others which are incorrect. It becomes necessary, then,
to have a second work-sheet on which we may take these fragments one
by one and try them as keys. If any one of them is a fragment of the
original key, _it must bring out fragments of plaintext, and must
bring them out at some regular interval_. If the scheme of Fig. 90 is
the one preferred, the second work-sheet may be prepared exactly like
the first, and used in the same way. The only difference is as
follows: On the first work-sheet, where the figure shows the word
SUPPLIES, a supposed trigram (_THE_, _AND_, etc.) will have been used
to bring out supposed key-fragments; on the second work-sheet, one of
these supposed key-fragments will have been used. These new rows of
decipherment may then be examined to find out whether any of the new
diagonals contain apparent plaintext fragments, and, if so, whether
these occur at a regular interval.

For this kind of work, however, Ohaver has offered us another routine
which requires somewhat more preparation than Carter’s but which is
well worth the extra trouble, especially if it be remembered that a
trigram-search is never necessary except with the shortest of
cryptograms. For the longer cryptograms, we have easier methods.
Ohaver’s plan can be examined in Fig. 91.

The cryptogram, shown at the top of this figure, contains 26 letters;
therefore, remembering that each letter, except the final two, may
begin a cipher-trigram, it contains 24 trigrams. The preparation of
the two work-sheets requires that these 24 cipher-trigrams be written
out in full on both sheets. This work should be done in ink, or on the
typewriter. Then, too, for a reason which will be explained in a
moment, it is well that the first of these work-sheets be prepared
with a great deal of space, say seven or eight lines, between its
rows of trigrams. Now, considering the first work-sheet, shown at
(a) of the figure: The upper row shows the 24 cipher-trigrams as
originally written out. We have been working down the trigram list,
using every normally frequent trigram as a trial key, and have failed
to find _THE_, _AND_, _THA_, or _ENT_, which means that we have done
quite a lot of tedious work. We have now reached the normally frequent
trigram _ION_, and this we have applied as a trial key, assuming one
by one that each of the 24 trigrams represents _ION_. We have, then,
24 decipherments on the second row, and _any one_ of these 24
deciphered trigrams might be a fragment of the original key. However,
it is natural to assume that a trigram _FRI_ or _WAY_ is more likely
than one such as _XHR_ or _NQB_, and those fragments which look like
usable sequences have been underscored in the figure. These are to be
tested first. At (b), we have the other work-sheet, the upper row, as
before, showing the 24 possible cipher-trigrams. Here, we have already
failed in our tests for key-fragments _FRI_, _WAY_, _DZI_, _NYE_,
which means that we have done some more tedious work, and we have now
arrived at the possible key-fragment _EDA_. If this sequence, _EDA_,
is actually a portion of the original key, it must not only bring out
fragments of a plaintext message, but must bring them out at some
constant distance apart. The point at which we found this is the tenth
trigram, and here it may be advisable to remind that this begins at
the tenth cryptogram letter; that is, _every trigram presents only
one new letter_, so that to find a completely different trigram in
either direction, we must count backward or forward a distance of
three trigrams.


                                   Figure 91

          L N F V E   O L N V M   R N G Q F   H H R N H   I R V F E   B,

                              (a)  Trial Sheet No. 1
  ION
      LNF   NFV   FVE   VEO   EOL   OLN   LNV   NVM   VMR   MRN   RNG   NGQ
      AZS   FRI   XHR   NQB   WAY   GXA   DZI   FHZ   NYE   EDA   JZT   FSD

      GQF   QFH   FHH   HHR   HRN   RNH   NHI   HIR   IRV   RVF   VFE   FEB
      YCS   IRU   XTU   ZTE   ZDA   JZU   FTV   ZUE   ADI   JHS   NRR   XQO

                              (b)  Trial Sheet No. 2
  EDA
      LNF   NFV   FVE   VEO   EOL   OLN   LNV   NVM   VMR   MRN   RNG   NGQ
      HKF   JCV   BSE   RBO   ALL   KIN   HKV   JSM   RJR   ION   NKG   JDQ

      GQF   QFH   FHH   HHR   HRN   RNH   NHI   HIR   IRV   RVF   VFE   FEB
      CNF   MCH   BEH   DER   DON   NKH   JEI   DFR   EOV   NSF   RCE   BBB

                           (c)  Testing out the Period 5

                 D A     E D A     E D A     E D A     E D A     E D
                 L N F V E O L N V M R N G Q F H H R N H I R V F E B
                 I N . . A L L . . I O N . . B E H . . D F R . . A Y

                                  (TION?)               (FRIDAY?)


Beginning, then, at the tenth trigram, and examining every third
trigram in both directions, we find that our key-fragment has given
us the following decipherments: _HKF_, _RBO_, _HKV_, _ION_, _CNF_,
_DER_, _JEI_, _NSF_. These are largely incoherent; but, in addition,
it must not be overlooked that on the continuously-written cryptogram,
these would be consecutive, giving us a message _H K F R B O_. . .
Applied at interval 3, then, our key-fragment _EDA_, will not
decipher us a message; therefore, the period of this cryptogram,
using this key, cannot be 3.

To examine for the possibility of a period 4, we start again with our
tenth trigram, and examine every fourth decipherment in both
directions; our series, this time, is _JCV_, _KIN_, _ION_, _MCH_,
_NKH_, _NSF_. Most of these are usable, and the first one might be
due to nulls, initials, and so on; but here again we have the reminder
that with each trigram representing only one new letter, these are
_almost consecutive_, starting at the second cryptogram letter, so
that our message, with each fourth letter missing, will be as follows:
_* J C V * K I N * I O N_. . . . Unless we can think of some letters
which would fill these gaps and provide plaintext, our period is
not 4.

Trying again, however, beginning at the tenth trigram and examining
each fifth decipherment, we find something more satisfactory: _ALL_,
_ION_, _BEH_, _DFR_. If these are correct, the period is 5. At (c),
we have gone back to the continuously-written cryptogram in order to
try these in their places; and since a period 5 would mean that each
of the letters _E D A_ is used regularly to encipher each fifth
letter, we are able to include two shorter decipherments at the two
ends of the cryptogram. The next step in logical order is to try
deciphering _T_ in front of _ION_, since the trigram _TIO_ would
have been the next one on our trigram list. This brings out
key-letter _C_, which, if correct, will decipher correctly at each
interval 5, and which extends our key-letters to _C E D A_. We can
see, too, that this is not the beginning of the word; the sequence
we have is _D A * C E_. In the given example, it is not difficult,
also, to guess a probable word, FRIDAY. Now, having twice called
attention to the fact that the trigram-search can grow quite tedious,
we hasten to point out that it need not be made more so by
deciphering each trigram individually. If your trial key is _THE_,
set your slide at the _T_-alphabet (or point this out on the
tableau), and decipher every first letter on the sheet. Then set the
_H_-alphabet in position, and decipher every second letter on the
sheet. Finally, set the _E_-alphabet in position and decipher all of
the remaining letters.

The foregoing few paragraphs have illustrated the worst case in
almost its worst form, but will show the principle. Now let us
consider this work in a much more usual case. As mentioned earlier,
the first of the two work-sheets will be prepared with a great deal
of space between the rows of trigrams. The full number of
decipherments will be made for the first trigram _THE_, but _not
erased_. Just below these, a second row of decipherments will be
made for _AND_, and these, too, will be left standing. (_THA_ can be
omitted.) A third row of decipherments is made for _ENT_, a fourth
row for _ION_, and so on down the list, until there are six or eight
rows of possible key-fragments. These are all examined and compared
with one another, in the hope of finding duplications. Perhaps _THE_
and _AND_ have _both_ brought out a key-fragment _EDA_, or one has
brought out _CED_ and the other _EDA_, having _ED_ in common. It is
far from unusual, in some of these cases, to find a whole series of
these overlapping key-fragments, for instance, _CON_, _ONS_, _NST_.
This will explain why many persons consider the trigram-search the
simplest and most direct way of attacking a Vigenère cryptogram.

For the benefit of the novice, we end the chapter at this point in
order that he may have some practice. Example 104 comprises a
thrilling serial with all the trimmings, gripping and original title,
smashing climax, and a brave hero, John Miller. The key to the title
is STRANGE. Part I repeats a word found in the title; part II repeats
a word of part I; and somewhere are the trigrams _NOT_, _CON_, _YET_,
_ING_, _TEN_, _THE_. We have heard, too, that an amateur encipherer
will occasionally encipher the nulls which he adds in his final group.
Example 105 is easily investigated through short common words. As to
the remaining examples, while it is true that they can be attacked by
the trigram method, the student will probably prefer to leave them
until he has seen the methods outlined in Chapters XIV and XV.


104.  By PICCOLA.  (For trigram practice.  A new key for each fragment).

Title of Serial:    S L K R N   T K W W Z   S N V T W   T I A A I   I X X X X.
Part I:     R I G Z V   Z K I U O   M H J L B   W F P K S   R Z T R H   E J T W I
O S W I O   S G Q I I.  Part II:  H H T X T   N E O L V   R M T U L   C L P P X
T Y R X K   U K B U W   U O J Z H   X M Z K H.   Part III:  S Y Z Y R   T N F U R
K C U S I   I R Q U X   W U F K C   J N R L Q   N F O K V   X M P U O   N H J A X
J H V O P.    Part IV:  X B V P Y   S X C J J   Y U R X O   T S P I N   Y I L U P
A V M X M   M F C I B   S T I T O   O T B R O.

105.  By PICCOLA.  (For investigation of short words. - Still Vigenère!)

V Y I   D J G I E J S   N V R J H J   F J   D B   G E K O W U Y   A R F F   Z W
V O K U   X R   P G   R   J U O E K M R B   U Y S U H   Q W   J L J G   C I W H G I W.

106.  By NEON.  (Any repeated trigram is worth watching!)

P Q X E J   F V E G Y   M N Y N Y   I U F R D   S G V R I   L P S G Z   T M E S I
R K N Y I   G P E R W   G R R N D   L O J N T   Y I D X O   T Y C I P   C R E V C
E S G O I   R L I S I   R Z Q E U   C G L T C   I X H Y I   X H E L E   K Y J E K
P X I E Y   R R S L H   D L I F Y   G P R J G   S D I C E.

107.  By THE ADMIRAL.  (Numbers are always possible!)

L V P R V   S F P T Y   J S P H L   F R C E U   S B O S Z   P H J F Z   N S O A P
K T T V V   Z C F R J   X C C T P   W W R H K   E W Y U K   W G L N U   X C C T P
X W G E R   F R Z N V   Z O W F J   W Q Z N U   K W Y O E   W M P A I.

108.  By NEON.  (This cryptogram, circulated in April, 1935, caused great
                   consternation among solvers.  Do you see any reason why?)

T W G J C   N I U J X   C S L S K   K B N V G   W I P S U   Q I U J A   U L J U Z
H B E V J   V M A O H   G G L T P   D G L E Y   S S L A F   I M J S W   Q I U M O
N N F L V   H I U I Z   D Q K V Y   R T W H I   M R F E U   K P N O V   Y T K E F
N V Q N O   T.

109.  By PICCOLA.

A X S E H   G O I W W   F O I A L   G E M Q W   E E N B W   R E I K L   S H Z Z Q
X L G A H   V P Z K L   D L G G D   W T C M H   Q D J N W   K E H M V   V A B M A.




CHAPTER XIII
The Gronsfeld, Porta, and Beaufort Ciphers

Now let us have a brief look at other classic ciphers of the
multiple-alphabet type, and see to what extent these will differ from
the Vigenère. The Gronsfeld cipher, as may be seen from the specimen
encipherment of Fig. 92, uses a number-key. Its ten alphabets are
governed by the ten digits. To encipher _S_, using key-digit 2,
simply begin at _S_ and count forward 2 in the normal alphabet; the
substitute is _U_. To encipher _E_ with key 8, begin at _E_ and count
forward 8 in the normal alphabet; the substitute is _M_. For
decipherment, count backward in the alphabet. A very superficial
investigation will show that the Gronsfeld key of the figure, 28105,
and the Vigenère key _CIBAF_ will produce identically the same
cryptograms. The key-digit _zero_ governs the _A_-alphabet of the
Vigenère, the key-digit 1 governs the _B_-alphabet, and so on to the
_J_-alphabet. If it is found convenient to use a tableau (as it may
be for the decipherment), the first ten cipher alphabets of the
Vigenère tableau can be ruled off from the rest, and the key-digits,
in the order 0 to 9, can be added beside the key-letters _A_ to _J_.
Or, if the slide is the preferred method, these digits can be written
beneath the first ten letters of the sliding alphabet; it is then
possible to slide them into position below the index (the stationary
_A_), in the same way as the letter-keys. The Gronsfeld cipher, then,
is no more than a minor variation of the Vigenère, and requires no
separate discussion other than a simple reminder that its
possibilities are far more limited than those of the Vigenère proper.
That is, it covers a range of only ten cipher alphabets where the
Vigenère covers 26, and this limitation more than compensates for the
fact that its key is not a plaintext word (presuming, that is, that
we know what cipher has been used. Otherwise, the difficulties are
about the same for both). To understand how this limitation may
modify the case, let us examine the work-sheet shown in Fig. 93.


                 Figure 92

          GRONSFELD Encipherment

  Key:         2 8 1 0 5   2 8 1 0 5   2 8...
  Plaintext:   S E N D S   U P P L I   E S...
  Cryptogram:  U M O D X   W X Q L N   G A...


Here, we have exactly the routine of Fig. 90, except that our search
must be made for probable trigrams, and not for a probable word. We
have begun with the most likely trigram, _THE_. But here we do not
find it possible to do as we did in Fig. 90; that is, _decipher every
letter_, first as _T_, then as _H_, then as _E_. Of the twelve
cryptogram-letters present, only seven can be deciphered as _T_; the
rest are too far away from it in the normal alphabet, and would
require keys larger than 9. Of the six letters which immediately
follow the possible _T_’s (the seventh is not shown), only three can
be deciphered as _H_. And of the three letters which immediately
follow a possible _TH_, only two can be deciphered as _E_ or as _A_.
It is often possible, in these ciphers, to investigate simultaneously
the trigrams _THE_ and _THA_. So far as the cryptogram is shown, then,
there are only two points at which a trigram _THE_ can be present,
while a Vigenère cryptogram of the same length would have presented
ten possibilities. Thus, we have no real need for a second work-sheet;
the only possible key-fragments, 114 and 790, can be tested by any
hit-or-miss method which happens to be quickest.


                               Figure 93

                      Decrypting a Known Gronsfeld

  Cryptogram Fragment:    X  U  I  I  A  Q  E  U  U  Y  J  W.......
  Trigram tried:    T     4  1/       7/       1  1  5/    3
                    H           1/       9/             2/
                    E              4/       0/

  The sequences U I I and A Q E are the only points at which the trigram
  T H E could possibly be present, so that only the key-sequences 1 1 4
  and 7 9 0 are to be tried.  The digram T H alone may be present at Y J.


This cipher is often decrypted in much the same way as a “Caesar”
simple substitution (shown in Fig. 61). The cryptogram, or a
convenient portion of it, is copied on a single line of writing; then,
with each letter as a point of beginning, a series of alphabets is
extended (written in reverse order), but only for a distance which
includes ten letters. That is, the ten possible decipherments for
each cryptogram-letter are written in the form of a ten-letter column.
The decryptor may then inspect the ten rows of decipherment to see
what he can find. At any point where it is possible to find _T_, _H_,
and _E_ in three consecutive columns, the correctness of this possible
_THE_ can be checked by finding out whether or not it has a series of
companion-trigrams standing at some regular interval on exactly the
same three rows.

  * * *

In Fig. 94, we have the tableau of Giovanni Battista della Porta,
adjusted to suit the modern 26-letter alphabet. Here we have only
thirteen cipher alphabets, each of which may be governed by either of
two key-letters; these pairs of keys may be seen at the left of their
respective alphabets. In all thirteen of these cipher alphabets, the
encipherment is _reciprocal_. In the _AB_-alphabet, for instance,
which is the first one on the chart, the substitute for _A_ is _N_,
and the substitute for _N_ is _A_. The Porta cipher, the oldest known
of its kind, employs a key-word, applied as in Vigenère. If the
key-letter in use is either _A_ or _B_, the topmost alphabet is the
one to be used; if the key-letter is either _C_ or _D_, the second
alphabet must be used; and so on. Where this encipherment is
illustrated in Fig. 95, it may be of some interest to observe that it
is not totally impossible for two different key-words to produce
identical cryptograms. As to decipherment, we have already mentioned
the fact of reciprocal substitution. Whenever the alphabets are
reciprocal (in any cipher), the decipherment is identically the same
process as encipherment.

 
             Figure 94

         The PORTA Tableau

  AB  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

  CD  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z N

  EF  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      P Q R S T U V W X Y Z N O

  GH  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      Q R S T U V W X Y Z N O P

  IJ  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      R S T U V W X Y Z N O P Q

  KL  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      S T U V W X Y Z N O P Q R

  MN  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      T U V W X Y Z N O P Q R S 

  OP  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      U V W X Y Z N O P Q R S T

  QR  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      V W X Y Z N O P Q R S T U

  ST  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      W X Y Z N O P Q R S T U V

  UV  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      X Y Z N O P Q R S T U V W

  WX  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      Y Z N O P Q R S T U V W X

  YZ  A B C D E F G H I J K L M
      Z N O P Q R S T U V W X Y


The Porta tableau, being smaller than the Vigenère, is not at all
inconvenient to prepare and use as it stands. It can be made still
more compact: The upper half being alike for all thirteen cipher
alphabets, this half can be written _once only_, at the top of the
chart. The lower halves can be written below this on thirteen parallel
lines, with their pairs of keys at the left. A ruler may then be
used, as suggested for Vigenère, to point out any given lower half.
But when it is noticed that these lower halves are identically the
same series of letters, with its point of beginning shifted one
letter at a time, it is promptly seen that a slide is possible, on
which the _N_-to-_Z_ half of the normal alphabet, if written twice in
succession, could be placed in 13 different positions with reference
to the _A_-to-_M_ half; and a slide is more convenient still. The
slide shown in Fig. 96 is another of Ohaver’s devices. The only new
feature in connection with the Porta slide lies in the handling of
the key-letters, which, in this cipher, are no longer the first
letters of their cipher alphabets. Mr. Ohaver has added them on the
sliding portion of the device, each pair of keys being placed directly
below the letter which must stand beneath the index (_A_) whenever one
or the other of the pair is the key-letter in use.


           Figure 95

       Porta Encipherment

  Keyword:     E A S T E A S T
  Plaintext:   S E N D S U P P...
  Cipher:      D R E Z D H G G...


       (Compare:)

  Keyword:     F A T S F A T S
  Plaintext:   S E N D S U P P...
  Cipher:      D R E Z D H G G...


The Porta cipher, aside from its purely historical interest, provides
a most interesting decryptment study in the formation of its
alphabets. Notice that because of the encipherment scheme itself, it
becomes totally impossible that the substitute for any letter, in any
cipher alphabet, can ever be taken from its own half of the normal
alphabet. This limitation is far more visible than that of the
Gronsfeld. We have, say, a cryptogram sequence _H E P_. Can this
represent the trigram _THE_? No, because _E_ cannot represent _H_;
for the same reason, it cannot represent _THA_. Can it represent
_AND_? No, because _H_ cannot represent _A_. Can it represent _ENT_?
No, because _H_ cannot represent _E_. Can it represent _ION_? _TIO_?
_FOR_? _NDE_? _HAS_? It is not until we reach _STH_ that we find a
normally frequent trigram which could have the substitutes _HEP_.
But to gather the full significance of this Porta limitation, and
also a suggestion concerning the detail work when taking advantage of
it, let us picture the case of a probable word: INFANTRY.

                          Figure 96

              A Slide for PORTA - Devised by OHAVER

              ┌─────────────────────────────────┐
              │    A B C D E F G H I J K L M    │
  ┌───────────┤  ┌───────────────────────────┐  ├───────────┐
  │   N O P Q │  │ T U V W X Y Z N O P Q R S │  │ V W X Y   │
  │           │  │                           │  │           │
  │           │  │   (Keys)                  │  │           │
  │   A C E G │  │ M O Q S U W Y             │  │           │
  │   B D F H │  │ N P R T V X Z             │  │           │
  └───────────┤  └───────────────────────────┘  ├───────────┘
              │                                 │
              └─────────────────────────────────┘


Using digits 1 and 2 to mean, respectively, the first and the second
half of the normal alphabet, this probable word INFANTRY has the
alphabetical pattern 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2. And, since every substitute
must have been taken from the other half of the normal alphabet, it
will certainly be represented in any Porta cryptogram by eight letters
having the opposite alphabetical pattern: 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 1. Moreover,
a pattern as long as this is not going to be found very often in any
one cryptogram. The decryptor, then, may proceed as in Fig. 97. Each
cryptogram letter is marked I or 2, or imagined to be so marked, and
this series of digits is examined in the hope of finding a sequence
2 1 2 2 1 1 1 1. If it cannot be found, the word is not present; if
it is found, it can be assumed to represent the word INFANTRY. Here,
we meet with a slight difference between the procedure for Vigenère
and the procedure for Porta.


                Figure 97

    THE PROBABLE WORD METHOD IN PORTA

  Pattern of word INFANTRY:  1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2
  Pattern of substitute:     2 1 2 2 1 1 1 1

  The cryptogram, with pattern:

  F J I D T U V S S L F F I T X M S T M E D L
  1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 1

  Determining the KEYWORD:

  .....X  M  S  T  M  E  D  L.....
       I  N  F  A  N  T  R  Y     

       E  C  A  M  C  E  C  A
       F  D  B  N  D  F  D  B
          D  A  N  C  E


In Vigenère, we found it possible to discover the key by simply
taking the probable word and deciphering with it. In Porta, we cannot
do this. We must first pair the two letters, that is, a supposed
substitute with its supposed original, and then find out what key
would cause this. In the figure, for instance, we have a sequence _X
M S T_, assumed to represent _I N F A_. The first corresponding pair
is _X_ = _I_. If we are using the tableau of Fig. 94, one of these
letters, _I_, is never found anywhere except in the 9th column. We
find the _I_-column, and trace down until we find _X_; the key, in
this case, must be _E_ or _F_, The next corresponding pair of letters
(_M_ representing _N_) demands that we find the _M_-column and trace
down to _N_; key _C_ or _D_. The third pair (_S_ representing _F_)
demands that we find the _F_-column, and trace down to _S_; key _A_
or _B_. The fourth pair (_T_ representing _A_) demands that we find
the _A_-column, and trace down to _T_; key _M_ or _N_.

Using the slide of Fig. 96: Place _X_ and _I_ together, and note that
the key-letters standing below the index (stationary _A_) are _EF_.
Place _M_ and _N_ together, and note key-letters _CD_. Place _S_ and
_F_ together, and note key-letters _AB_. Place _T_ and _A_ together,
and note key-letters _MN_. From the recovered pairs of key-letters,
we are to select one each in order to recover the key-word, using
somewhat the logic we might apply in dealing with a key-phrase
cryptogram. In the given case, where we need the two vowels to form
any word at all, it is not difficult to surmise that the key-word was
DANCE. It might not be so easy to decide as between EAST and FATS;
but key-words, as a rule, are seldom so short as those we have been
using, and the longer the word, the fewer the possibilities.
Concerning keys, however, there is one contingency which may have to
be considered: The various modernized versions of this tableau are
not always duplicates. The cipher alphabets will be the same as those
given here; but where we have caused these to shift in the normal
direction, another tableau may show them shifting in reverse. The
first alphabet will be the same as here, but the second, still showing
key-letters _CD_, will show its lower half beginning _Z N O P_. . . ;
the third, still showing key-letters _EF_, will show its lower half
beginning _Y Z N O P_. . . ; and so on. The recovery of the key-word,
of course, is not vital.

  * * *

Coming now to the two ciphers which are called Beaufort, we return to
a tableau so closely resembling Vigenère’s tableau that the two can
be used interchangeably. Fig. 98 shows only enough of the Beaufort
tableau to bring out the difference in form. Here, we find no separate
plaintext alphabet and no separate key-alphabet. Those which form the
square have been lengthened by repeating their first letters; and a
27th alphabet, added at the bottom of the tableau, repeats the
alphabet shown at the top. In this way, we have a 27 x 27 alphabet
square in which _all four of the outside alphabets are exactly alike_.
These ciphers, also, make use of a key-word, applied as in Vigenère
and in Porta. As Sir Francis Beaufort himself is said to have used
the tableau, the encipherment of a given plaintext-letter, using a
given key-letter, was accomplished as follows: To encipher plaintext
_S_ with key _C_, find the letter _S_ in any one of the four outside
alphabets, trace into the square along the _S_-column (or row) as far
as the key-letter _C_; at that point, turn a right angle, in either
direction, and trace outward along that row (or column), emerging
from the square at the substitute, which, in the given case, is _K_.
Or: To _decipher_ _K_ with key _C_, begin with _K_, and _follow
identically the encipherment process_, emerging this time at the
plaintext letter, _S_. This process we have called the _true Beaufort_
cipher. Notice that we have _reciprocal encipherment_; encipherment
and decipherment are identically the same thing.


                                   Figure 98

                     Upper Portion of the BEAUFORT Tableau


             A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A
             B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B
             C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C
             D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D
             E F G H I J K L M....  (Etc.)   ....W X Y Z A B C D E

         There are no external alphabets.  The four outer alphabets of the
         square are exactly alike, with A in each of the four corners.

  TRUE BEAUFORT Encipherment               VARIANT BEAUFORT Encipherment      

  Key:        C O M E T C O M E T C O      Key:        C O M E T C O M E T C O
  Plaintext:  S E N D S U P P L I E S      Plaintext:  S E N D S U P P L I E S
  Cipher:     K K Z B B I Z X T L Y W      Cipher:     Q Q B Z Z S B D H P C E


As to the companion cipher, the student will promptly have guessed
this for himself: Instead of starting with the plaintext-letter, _S_,
and tracing inward to the key-letter, it is entirely feasible to begin
with key-letter _C_ and trace inward to the plaintext-letter _S_,
emerging at _Q_ instead of at _K_. This cipher, too, is called
Beaufort, since its method of accomplishment is Beaufort’s method.
But there is a difference in the two resulting ciphers; notice here
that the encipherment is no longer reciprocal; should we start at
key-letter _C_, trace inward to the new cipher-letter, _Q_, and then
trace outward, we do not emerge from the square at the plaintext
letter _S_, but at _O_, an entirely new letter. In order to
distinguish the two ciphers, we have referred to this second process
as the _variant Beaufort_, or sometimes, more briefly, as “the
variant.” There is some justification, also, for calling it the
“Vigenère-Beaufort.” To see why, the student may turn back to his
Vigenère tableau, and actually perform the encipherment, using only
the two sides of this tableau in which the alphabets run from _A_ to
_Z_.

In applying the variant encipherment, in which key-letters are found
first, he need find a given key-letter but once, then lay a ruler
along the row (or column) indicated by that key-letter, and encipher
at a single writing all plaintext letters which are going to have that
particular key. But if, as previously recommended, he has familiarized
himself with the use of the Vigenère tableau, he will see instantly
that the operation which, in the variant Beaufort he is calling
_encipherment_, is identical, in every particular, with the operation
which, in Vigenère, he would have called _decipherment_, and that, in
order to decipher the variant, he must perform the operation which,
in Vigenère, is called encipherment. Neither of these operations
provides a reciprocal substitution; instead, they are reciprocal to
each other. Once it is seen that this is true, it becomes equally
plain that the Saint-Cyr slide serves just as well for the variant
as for the Vigenère. To make use of it in applying the variant
encipherment, set key-letters below index-letter _A_, exactly as if
making ready to encipher in Vigenère, but reverse the functions of
the two alphabets; that is, find all plaintext letters in the lower
one, and take their substitutes from the upper one.


                                   Figure 99

                  How to find the C-alphabet of each Beaufort

            TRUE BEAUFORT                             VARIANT BEAUFORT

  Key:              C C C C C C C C        Key:              C C C C C C C C
  Plaintext:        A B C D E F G H...     Plaintext:        A B C D E F G H...
  Cipher ALPHABET:  C B A Z Y X W V...     Cipher ALPHABET:  Y Z A B C D E F...


Now, consider the true Beaufort cipher: Here, plaintext letters are
found first, and keys are found by tracing into the square, so that
encipherment is more or less a letter-by-letter process, and hardly
so convenient as in the other two ciphers. It is true that every
ascending diagonal in the tableau is made up of only one key-letter,
so that a ruler, laid diagonally across this tableau, will point out
a whole line of _C_’s, or _O_’s, or _M_’s. But practically every one
of these diagonals is broken into two portions, so that in attempting
to encipher by one key-letter at a time, we find it rather confusing
to make the necessary adjustments. Is there not, then, a more
convenient method for applying the Beaufort? Every cipher of this
family, remember, provides a certain number of individual simple
substitution cipher-alphabets. For every key (whether it is a letter
or a number) there is some kind of cipher alphabet showing a
substitute for _A_, a substitute for _B_, a substitute for _C_, and
so on. To isolate one of these cipher alphabets, and find out what it
is like, we have merely to take some one key-letter (or some one
key-number) and discover what these substitutes are, and what their
order is; that is, we need merely _encipher the normal alphabet_,
using this one key. This is true of every cipher of the
multiple-alphabet type. The process can be seen in Fig. 99, where the
_C_-alphabet (that is, the alphabet governed by key-letter _C_) is
being isolated for each of the Beaufort ciphers.

In the Beaufort proper, we find that the _C_-alphabet will begin with
_C_ and come out in the order _C B A Z Y X_. . . . , which is merely
the normal alphabet reversed. Should we investigate the _D_-alphabet,
we should find that this begins at _D_ and comes out in the order
_D C B A Z Y_. . . . , again the normal alphabet reversed; or,
investigating the _E_-alphabet, we should find _E D C B A Z_. . . . ,
always the normal alphabet written backward, and always beginning with
whatever letter is called the key. This being the case, it becomes
quite evident that a slide is possible, and the formation of this
slide is clearly indicated in the left-hand tabulation of the figure:
Its upper alphabet must run in one direction and its lower alphabet
in the other; if one of the two is made of double length, it becomes
possible to place any one of the 26 key-letters in juxtaposition with
index _A_, thus bringing into position any one of the 26
cipher-alphabets which are governed by these keys. Nor does it make a
particle of difference which of the two _A_’s, the upper or the lower,
is regarded as the index-letter; when _C_ is standing below _A_, then
_A_ is also standing below _C_. We saw, in the tableau itself, that
the true Beaufort encipherment gives reciprocal substitution. This,
however, was not our first meeting with one of the Beaufort alphabets;
in Chapter IX, we met the _Z_-alphabet. We saw there that whenever a
cipher alphabet is merely the plaintext alphabet written backward, it
makes no difference which of the two is called a cipher alphabet; we
may see here that this fact is not altered by shifting one of the
alphabets. Since a slide is possible, it follows that a disk is also
possible. This particular cipher disk, on which one alphabet runs
forward and the other backward, was used long ago in our own army,
and is widely known in this country as “The United States Army Cipher
Disk.” Most persons, apparently, prefer the slides, on which the
letters are always right-side up, and the preparation of which does
not involve the division of a circle into 26 equal arcs. Of those who
prefer the disks, practically all will make the smaller disk
_reversible_, with the normal alphabet on one side and the reversed
alphabet on the other.


                       Figure 100

           A Pair of COMPLEMENTARY Alphabets:

  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B

  By doubling the length of one or the other of these
  two alphabets, we may use them to form a slide which
  will encipher and decipher the true BEAUFORT.


Now, returning to our Fig. 99, and examining its right-hand
tabulation: We find that, in isolating the _C_-alphabet of the
variant Beaufort, we have merely reproduced the _Y_-alphabet of the
Vigenère. Should we now isolate its _Y_-alphabet, we should find that
we have obtained the _C_-alphabet of the Vigenère. Further
investigation will show that the _D_-alphabet of one is the
_X_-alphabet of the other, that the _E_-alphabet of one is the
_W_-alphabet of the other; and so on. Only their _A_-alphabets and
their _N_-alphabets are keyed alike. Thus we seem to have here a case
of “reciprocal” key-letters. These particular pairs of corresponding
letters, _B_ and _Z_, _C_ and _Y_, _D_ and _X_, and so on, are called
_complements_, one letter of each pair being _complementary_ to the
other. Since the letters _A_ and _N_ have no complements (or serve as
their own complements), the normal alphabet will furnish only twelve
such pairs, and these are shown complete in Fig. 100. In this same
set-up, it can be seen that the _A_-alphabet of the Beaufort cipher
is the complement of the normal alphabet. Thus, having provided
ourselves with a Beaufort slide (or disk), we have always at hand a
means for finding out the complements of letters. Once it is clearly
understood that the chief difference between a Vigenère cryptogram
and a variant cryptogram lies in the names of their respective cipher
alphabets, it becomes evident that we might decrypt a variant,
believing it to be a Vigenère, and have no trouble whatever in
reading its message, though finding that it has an _incoherent key_.
Vigenère keys, of course, can be incoherent; occasionally they are
based in some way on numbers, following the Gronsfeld scheme. But
usually, this is not true; the incoherency is only apparent, and a
little investigation will discover what the trouble is. In the case
just mentioned, the variant key-word COMET will come out in Vigenére
as _Y M O W H_, or vice versa; all that is necessary, in order to
discover the original key-word, is to set the Beaufort slide at the
_A_-alphabet, and perform a bit of simple substitution. Another cause
for the apparently incoherent key lies in the use of some other
index-letter than the stationary _A_. Say, for instance, that the
encipherer has used the key-word COMET, but has placed his key-letters
beneath index _D_. The key recovered by the decryptor is _Z L J B Q_;
to find the original key-word, he need merely “run it down the
alphabet.”


                                   Figure 101

                       Applying a PROBABLE WORD to BEAUFORT
     (a)
     Cryptogram, TRUE BEAUFORT:   K  K  Z  B  B  I  Z  X  T  L  Y  W  T  Q

     Probable word.......... S    C  C  R  T  T  A  R  P  L  D  Q  O  L  I
                             U       E  T  V  V  C  T  R  N  F  S  Q  N  K
                             P          O  Q  Q  X  O  M  I  A  N  L  I  F
                             P             Q  .  .  .  M  I  A  N  .  I  .
                             L                            E
                             I                               T
                             E                                  C
                             S                                     O

     Use the word SUPPLIES as a trial key, exactly as in Vigenère, but make
     use of the VARIANT method, and not tho TRUE BEAUFORT.

                                      ***
                                      ***
  (b)
  Cryptogram, VARIANT BEAUFORT:   Q  Q  B  Z  Z  S  B  D  H  P  C  E  H  K

  Probable word............. S    Y  Y  J  H  H  A  J  L  P  X  K  M  P  S
                             U       W  H  F  F  Y  H  J  N  V  I  K  N  Q
                             P          M  K  K  D  M  O  S  A  N  P  S  V
                             P             .  .  .  .  O  S  .  N  .  P  .
                             L                            W 
                             I                               H 
                             E                                  Y 
                             S                                     M 

  This was deciphered as a Vigenère, and showed the repeating of a scrambled
  key:   Y M O W H.   Had it been deciphered with the BEAUFORT SLIDE, suggested
  in Figure 100, it would have reproduced the plaintext keyword,  C O M E T.


Of the ciphers we have seen, then, those three which are complete,
that is, which employ a full 26 alphabets, are curiously interrelated
to one another. In the matter of substitution (encipherment and
decipherment), the Beaufort stands alone, in that it is reciprocal,
while the other two ciphers are reciprocal to each other in this
respect. But in the matter of keys, it is the Vigenère which stands
alone, in that it can be deciphered indifferently by key-letter or
message-letter, where this is not true of either Beaufort. _In this
respect, these two ciphers are reciprocal_. To see this plainly, we
may examine our three encipherments, each one showing a different
cryptogram obtained from the plaintext fragment SEND SUPPLIES, using
key COMET. The Vigenère version was seen in Fig. 90. If this be
_deciphered with its message_, SEND SUPPLIES, the result is a
repeating key-word COMET COMET CO. The other two cryptograms were
those of Fig. 98. Here, the Beaufort cryptogram, beginning
_K K Z B B_, if deciphered with the key COMET, gives the
message-letters _S E N D S_. But when we attempt to decipher it using
_S E N D S_ as our key, we obtain: _I U O C R_. It becomes necessary,
in order to find out our key-letters, that we proceed as we did for
Porta: Assuming that the slide is being used, place message _S_
beside cipher _K_, and find out what key-letter is standing beside
the index _A_. Place _E_ and _K_ together, and find the next key,
and so on. That is, change the position of the slide for every
decipherment.

In this same figure, the variant cryptogram begins _Q Q B Z Z_. If it
be deciphered with the correct key-word COMET, we obtain the correct
message-letters, _S E N D S_. But if we attempt to decipher it with a
key _S E N D S_, we obtain the same series as in the other case:
_I U O C R_. To decipher it as a variant, we must again proceed
letter by letter. How, then, are we going to apply a probable word as
we did with the Vigenère in Fig. 90? How are we going to decipher a
whole row of letters, first as _S_, then as _U_, then as _P_, and so
on? Must we do this letter by letter, shifting the slide for every
letter on every row? And suppose it is a page of trigrams, where we
wish to decipher every trigram on the page as _THE_? Is there no way
in which we can decipher all first-letters as _T_, all second letters
as _H_, and all third letters as _E_, with only three settings of a
slide? The answer is simple. _Switch the slides_. We have said (and
shown) that in this respect the two Beauforts are reciprocal. Where
the cryptogram is true Beaufort, and you desire to use your probable
word as a trial key, do this with your Saint-Cyr slide (used in
reverse, that is, as if enciphering in Vigenère). If your cryptogram
is variant Beaufort, use the Beaufort slide (or treat it as a
Vigenère, and obtain the key later). Both cases can be looked at in
Fig. 101. The cryptogram at (a) is our same Beaufort cryptogram; that
at (b) is our same variant. In another chapter, we shall look a little
more closely into this odd triangle of Vigenère-variant-Beaufort.
Meanwhile, the interested student might like to investigate for
himself a few of the curious angles:

Would it be possible to prepare a tableau for the true Beaufort, and
use it in exactly the manner described for Vigenère? Recalling the
appearance of the Vigenère tableau (Fig. 85): Suppose we should add
to this another vertical alphabet, this time on the right-hand side,
causing this new alphabet to begin at _A_ and run backward,
_A Z Y X_. . . . Could this new alphabet be made to serve any useful
purpose? More than one? What about the reversible cipher-disk? Is
there any way at all in which it would be possible to encipher and
decipher Vigenère cryptograms with a Beaufort slide, or Beaufort
cryptograms with a Vigenère slide? Could you make a cipher disk for
the Porta?


110.  By NEON. (Gronsfeld).

J Q Q Y P   I R S F Q   Y J N E U   R U V E F   V W P E B   Q F G T E   M K U K G
R W E T Z   I D V I Q   Q S Z I H   K W M C E   K B F J Q   Q X T R F   V R J K O
A T E E N   J U M S N   G L P I B   S O A S R   Y S A X R   U O J G W   M V R U S
V D Q Q R   D P P K P   L I C.

111.  By B. NATURAL.  (Gronsfeld).

            L N P L G   S Y R U A   I R I Q X   R E N D I   U U N H D
            Y M S U U   O Q N S T   I T U G L   W R E R V   B Z D U Q
            S I C T U   Q B T F X   J F E H J   W N I K U   N H A Y H
            I E P R G   X K W M P   U K U L F   N G Q P R   B X Z R E
            T E U U W   T R X J F   N H J Y O   J U V S P   N W O Z G
            S O Q C J   N W K G E   B X Z R I   P U N X B   N A W O -

112.  By B. NATURAL.  (Porta).

I O U K J   G F Y S M   Q S X H W   W D P K M   M J E S P   Y W Y L B   X B V U D
X T V L V   O G Q K S   L W W Q S   E U D K W   J I A M G   W Z C W F   O U I M M
V Z F U Q   K S O X D   S E L E E   P T I O T   U L U L W   W P K Q K   S Z E U.

113.  By KRIS KROST.  (Beaufort.  Probable word:  AMERICA).

N D L H T   I E Y R K   F M F H L   C S Z Q A   H B H T Y   H A F P I   V I D C S
X P Z E X   N K W Q R   M S A H E   Q X G R E   H A U H G   D S O O A   G X U G D
W G T I L   S A P D V   H A Q W E   W Z M I M   Y Y Q O B   F E K C M   M T F N E
V H W Z Y   B G P W V   E H R Z V   U O O N B   K X F O Z   J A Z I Q   N Z T T O
P R V I T.

114.  By WHOSIT.  (Variant Beaufort).

K O A S Y   B B S G P   A R Y A T   F R F D U   L W H J A   R G H S G   U W D B C
J R V M C   U P S T Q   W M B Y S   I W Y I F   H B A A F   I A N Y H   J L S B T
J O C Z E   E N N R U   A S R U I   E J N O E   P S G C G   W V U M E   A K W R L
Y H N S R   G H B A H.

115.  By PICCOLA.  (Short Simple Substitution. - No keyword).

O F   T D A F   F B E H Z H W G   W F O M;   M F W R   J D E D N V F P   Z K
W F D Y F M Z   Q K K Z T.




CHAPTER XIV
The Kasiski Method for Periodic Ciphers

Prior to the 1860’s, the ciphers of the past two chapters had been
regarded as entirely safe. A radical change of opinion took place in
1863, when Major F. W. Kasiski, a German cryptanalyst, was so
indiscreet as to publish certain of his observations. The student
will surely have noticed, among the examples of Chapters XII and XIII,
the happening which is suggested in Fig. 102. Some sequence, usually
a digram, is repeated in the plaintext, and happens to be enciphered
more than once by exactly the same few key-letters; the result is a
_repeated sequence in the cryptogram_. What he may have failed to
notice is the _periodicity_ of such repeated sequences. In order that
the same few key-letters be used again, _the key-word must have been
repeated an exact number of times_, so that, in these cases of
repeated cryptogram-sequences, the distance from first-letter to
first-letter is _evenly divisible by the key-length_ — or period (in
the figure, the distance from _V_ to _V_ is 10, which is twice the
key-length, 5). This does not mean that all repeated sequences found
in Vigenère cryptograms are periodic. Often, they are purely
accidental; oftener still, they will be due to the repetition of
alphabets in the key itself, especialiy if it is such a word as
CORCORAN or DESDEMONA. But a distinct majority of them, according to
Kasiski, are caused by periodicity; and if all of the repeated
sequences found in a given cryptogram be examined to find what the
separating interval is in each case, and if all of these intervals be
factored, _the factor which predominates will betray the period of
the cryptogram_.


                      Figure 102

        A common happening in all PERIODIC ciphers:

  Vigenère key:       C O M E T C O M E T C O M E T C O M
  Plaintext:          T H E R E I S A N O T H E R Q U E S
  REPEATED SEQUENCE:  V V Q V . . . . . . V V Q V . . . .


In order to have a look at the Kasiski method, we will consider the
cryptogram shown in Fig. 103; and, to approximate a more troublesome
case, we will assume that no repeated sequences can be found except
those few which have been underscored in the figure. With the
cryptogram-letters serially numbered, in the manner shown, the
distance apart of any two of them is readily learned by subtraction.
The digram _CH_ is found beginning at the 1st letter and again at the
46th letter; 46 minus 1 equals 45, their distance apart. Thus, if
_CH_ is one of the periodic repetitions, the period could be 15, 9,
5, or even 3. The trigram _UBF_, 8th and 63d letters, shows an
interval 55; here, the period could be 11 or 5. Notice that a period
5 has been indicated by both.

Now let us look at Fig. 104, where the method of presentation is once
more a debt to M. E. Ohaver. In this figure, the repeated sequences
have been listed, and each one is accompanied by the two serial
numbers of its two first letters, together with the interval which
was obtained by subtraction. Ohaver’s process provides a column for
each possible factor, beginning with 2 and carried as far as desired.
Opposite each interval, its various possible factors may then be
noted in their correct columns. In the average case, the correct
period will be pointed out by _the column showing the largest number
of entries_. But in this connection, it must be taken into
consideration that _small_ factors 2 and 3, and even factors 4 and 5,
are usually present in considerable numbers, partly as accidentals,
but also because they are factors of the period itself; that is, if
the period is 6, there will surely be factors 2 and 3 for every
factor 6, and there will usually be a few extra appearances due to
accidental repetition.


                                  Figure 103

          5          10          15          20          25          30
  C H G S L   F A U B F   X U P H S   J D A G Y   X M N Z U   W W J P D

         35          40          45          50         55           60
  J S U P L   G C G F K   R N I M F   C H K O A   Q A V X O   N N U I L

         65          70          75          80         85           90
  N S U B F   N D V P K   A I P L S   N M Q O H   M E U I L   B L K Q W

         95          100         105         110         115         120
  N D V I Y   X U I I A   Q E U U Y   J W C O K   O E N M P   W W J J J

         125         130         135         140         145         150
  Q I U O V   C M W D O   X F C O L   F S K U L   V B W U N   R V G T B

         155         160         165         170
  B S Q N L   U E P H A   Q T Q X V   A K Q O E


Now, considering our tabulation, and ignoring the fact that short
periods like 2 and 3 are seldom encountered, we find that factors 3
and 5 are present in equal numbers. Often, we are faced with exactly
this problem. Here are two factors which have appeared in approximately
equal numbers. Which one of these actually represents the period?
Ohaver’s recommendations include these: Where two factors seem almost
equally prominent, select the larger if it is a multiple of the
smaller. If one factor is not a multiple of the other, try to select
a period which is a multiple of both (as 15 here, includes both 3 and
5). He points out also that the factor which is the correct key-length
will usually be accompanied, in the tabulation, by quite a number of
its own multiples, growing gradually fewer and fewer as their size
increases. In this respect, our factors 3 and 5 are both disappointing.
If we consider factor 5, we find factors 10 and 15, but not growing
fewer; instead the number increases. We find no factor 20, but we do
find a factor 25; another increase. Or, if we consider factor 3, we
find factors 6 and 9, but no factor 12, and then a sudden increase in
the number of factors 15. This is a case in which the decryptor would
play safe by selecting the period 15.


                                    Figure 104

                           Tabulation for Finding Period            M.E.OHAVER

  Repeated   Positions -                 POSSIBLE FACTORS of INTERVALS
  Sequence         Intervals                                                   

     C H      46 -  1 =  45          3     5           9                15
     U B F    63 -  8 =  55                5                11
     U P      33 - 12 =  21          3           7                         21
     S U      62 - 32 =  30       2  3     5  6          10             15
     P L      73 - 34 =  39          3                            13
     W W J   116 - 26 =  90       2  3     5  6        9 10             15 18
     N D V    91 - 66 =  25                5                               25

   The factors found in the largest number of DIFFERENT intervals are  3  and  5.


The student who cares to examine this matter more closely may do so
by preparing for himself a less haphazard listing of the cryptogram’s
repeated sequences. Perhaps the most satisfactory way of doing this
is to begin by making a general frequency count. Then, in order to
have the more reliable information at once, start the tabulations by
examining those letters whose frequency is only 2; follow this with
an examination of those having a frequency of 3, and so on. The
theory is that letters of these frequencies are much more likely to
belong to only one alphabet, while the letters of higher frequency
have probably been enciphered in several different alphabets, so that
their repeated sequences are not so sure to be periodic. For other
cases in which there may be some doubt, the writer’s advice is to
select large factors in preference to small factors. Or, if the
decision must be made between two factors such as 6 and 7, where a
period of 42 would be necessary in order to include both, simply
select the handiest and give it a trial. With the longer cryptograms,
as we shall see in a moment, an error in the choice is very speedily
discovered; as to the shorter cryptograms, there is one rule which
invariably holds good: _If you meet with any resistance at all_ in
dealing with the kind of ciphers which were shown in the past two
chapters, you have probably selected the wrong period.


                               Figure 105

               Individual Frequency Counts - PERIOD  5 

      Alphabet 1   Alphabet 2   Alphabet 3   Alphabet 4   Alphabet 5

  A     11           11           1                         111
  B     11           1                         11           1
  C     111          1            11
  D                  111                       1            1
  E                  1111                                   1
  F     11           1                         1            111
  G     1                         111          1
  H                  11                        11           1
  I                  11           11           1111
  J     111                       11           1            1
  K                  1            111                       111
  L                  1                         1            11111 11
  M     1            111                       11
  N     11111        11           11           1            1
  O     1                                      11111 1      11
  P                               111          111          1
  Q     1111                      1111         1
  R     11 
  S                  1111                      1            11
  T                  1                         1
  U     1            11           11111 11     111          1
  V     1            1            111                       11
  W     11           111          11                        1
  X     1111                                   11
  Y                                                         111
  Z                                            1


Often, however, where one clue is missing, there will be another
present to take its place. Repeated _trigrams_ are less likely than
repeated digrams to be accidental, and longer repeated sequences are
still less likely to be so. In the present tabulation, we find that
three of the repetitions are trigrams; in all three cases the period
5 is suggested, while only one suggests also a period 3. That is, if
we use a period of 15, two of these trigrams will have to be
considered accidental.

If the period here is 5, then we are dealing with _five simple
substitution alphabets_. These five alphabets have been used over and
over again, always in a given rotation; therefore, if the cryptogram
be rewritten into _five columns_ (it is already conveniently grouped),
the letters in each column will belong to one same alphabet, and it
becomes possible to _take a separate frequency count on each one of
these five alphabets_. These individual frequency counts may be seen
in Fig. 105. Originally, we had a length of 170 letters, and, if the
student desires to take a frequency count on the complete cryptogram,
he will find that he has no truly predominant letters which could
represent some of the letters _E T A O N I R S H_. Instead, he has a
series of frequencies which are all fairly close to 4% of the text
(6 or 7), and which, should he rearrange them in decreasing order,
would have somewhat the following appearance:
10-10-10-9-9-9-8-8-8-7-7-7-7. . . . . .3-2-2-1. He will probably find,
also, that every letter of the alphabet has been used at least once,
something which would be very rare indeed in any normal English text
of 170 letters. But in these five individual frequency counts, each
belonging to a separate alphabet, matters are different. Here, the
alphabets represented have a length of only 34 letters each, and yet,
in the third, fourth, and fifth alphabets, there is one predominant
letter, which could represent _E_, or some other letter which has
taken the place of _E_, while, in the first and second alphabets,
there are some few letters distinctly more prominent than others.
Also, each alphabet has shown some gaps in sequence, where letters of
the class _J K Q X Z_, and possibly also some letters like _B P V W_,
would surely be missing in a normal text of only 34 letters.

A frequency count made on columns is not, of course, normal. We saw
this in dealing with transpositions, when we considered
vowel-distribution. Yet, as length increases, we find that the letters
present in columns begin to approach more and more the proportions
found in normal text; here, with only 34 letters, it would be
possible, in any one of these frequency counts, to assign the letters
to groups of high, moderate, and low frequencies. _Whenever our
frequency counts do not have this general aspect, the period cannot
be correct_. (There are, of course, the very short cryptograms, in
which the actual frequencies are not apparent.) So far, we are dealing
with any cipher whatever of the periodic type, and many of these
ciphers do not make use of simple shifted alphabets, or even of
alphabets which are in any way related to one another.

Now let us consider the one case in which the alphabets are all
“Caesars.” In this case, whether the cipher is Vigenère, Beaufort, or
Porta, we have only to identify one letter in order to identify a
whole alphabet. Suppose we examine, first, alphabet 5, in which the
one outstanding letter, _L_, has appeared 7 times. Does this letter
represent _e_? If _L_ of alphabet 5 represents _e_, then, counting
backward (that is, upward), we find that the letter _a_ will have to
be represented by _H_; this alphabet, then, will be the _H_-alphabet
if the cipher is Vigenère. The letter _H_ has a frequency of only 1,
which, in normal text, is not particularly satisfactory as the
frequency of _a_, but this frequency count has not been taken from
normal continuous text; suppose we examine the rest of the alphabet,
and find out what the frequencies would be for other letters.
Beginning at _H_, and calling letters in the order _a_, _b_, _c_, we
find that this fifth alihabet, provided it is the _H_-alphabet, will
contain: 3 _d_’s, 7 _e_’s, 2 _h_’s, 2 _l_’s, 2 _o_’s, 3 _r_’s,
3 _t_’s, and 3 _y_’s. That is, each letter present which shows a
frequency greater than 1 will represent some plaintext original
which, normally, is of some frequency, the only exception being _y_,
which is a vowel. This is the best we can expect of any columnar
frequency count made on only 34 letters; but more convincing still,
and more reliable, is the fact that out of the entire group
_j k q x z_ we find only _x_, represented once. Alphabet 5, then, is
entirely acceptable as the _H_-alphabet of the Vigenère cipher.

Let us see what we can find out about alphabet 3. Here, the strongly
predominant letter is _U_. But when we attempt to identify this as
_e_, we find that we should have to accept an alphabet containing
3 _q_’s, 2 _x_’s, and 3 _z_’s, all occurring in only thirty-odd
letters of text. We meet with similar trouble when we attempt to
identify _U_ as _t_, as _a_, as _o_, and so on. It is not until we
try it as _s_ that we have good luck, finding only a series of blanks
to represent the letters _b_, _j_, _k_, _q_, _v_, _w_, _x_, and _z_.
And if _U_ represents _s_, this alphabet begins at _C_. Alphabet 3,
then, is entirely acceptable as the _C_-alphabet of the Vigenère
cipher, and we have two of the key-letters: * * _C_ * _H_.

In alphabet 1, the leading letter, _N_, is not so strongly
predominant, and yet, when we assume it as the substitute for _e_,
we find that the rest of the count is satisfactory. Alphabet 1, then,
is acceptable as the _J_-alphabet of the Vigenère cipher and we have
three of the key-letters: _J_ * _C_ * _H_.

In alphabet 2, we find no one leading letter, but the two most
prominent frequencies are standing opposite _E_ and _S_, as if this
count might represent the normal alphabet itself. The absence of _O_
and the presence of only one _T_ is hardly significant in a columnar
count; but further examination shows an excess of _M_’s and _W_’s,
and this is more disturbing. However, a single _K_ has appeared as
the only representative of the group _J K Q X Z_; the low-frequency
letters _B_ and _V_ have appeared but once each; and there is an
absence of _Y_’s to counterbalance those which were too numerous in
one of our other alphabets. So that a detailed examination, and the
failure to identify this as any other alphabet, will lead to its
tentative acceptance as the _A_-alphabet of the Vigenère cipher. (We
can know definitely when we attempt to decipher with it.) With
alphabet 2 accepted as the _A_-alphabet, we now have four of the
key-letters: _J A C_ * _H_. We shall return in a moment to consider
the one which is still missing; but according to those present, it
does not look as if our key is going to develop into a recognizable
word.

Alphabets of the kind we saw in No. 2 can be much more satisfactorily
identified by means of a _graph_. This graph, when the cipher is
Vigenère, is no more than a picture of the normal frequency table.
Ordinarily, it will be a strip of paper on which the normal alphabet
has been written twice in succession, with a straight line standing
at right angles to each letter, this line being long or short
according to the normal frequency of its accompanying letter.

A description of one such graph, suggested by L. H. Patty, will serve
to explain them all: Assuming that the several frequency counts are
standing in a vertical position, as we see them in Fig. 105, and that
the work has been done on quadrille paper, the graph will also be
prepared vertically, and the strip of paper will be quadrille paper
with squares of the same size, so that the spacing, vertically, will
be the same for graph and frequency counts. The graph, however, will
be twice the length of the frequency counts, and will carry the normal
alphabet written twice in succession (except that the final _Z_ can
be omitted). The basis for frequencies can be 200, 100, or any other
basis desired. If the basis is 200, each small square might represent
a frequency of 5, so that a horizontal line placed beside _E_
(frequency 24), would have a length of nearly five of the small
squares. Or, if the basis is 100, each small square might represent a
frequency of 2, and the horizontal line placed beside _E_ (frequency
12), would have a length of six of the small squares. Or, if this
same graph is being made on a typewriter, we might dispense with the
horizontal lines and use a series of diagonals (or 1’s, or asterisks),
after the manner of tally-marks, using whatever number of these is the
actual frequency of the letter per 200, or per 100; this will give a
good clear picture of the normal frequency count. It is understood
that the upper and lower halves of the graph are to be prepared
exactly alike, and that there is to be no skipping of extra spaces
between them. Thus the graph, being twice the length of the frequency
counts, and spaced to match them, can be moved up and down beside each
one of these until some point is found at which the _pattern_ of the
given frequency count bears some resemblance to a pattern found
somewhere on the graph. If no such pattern can be found, the
conclusion is that the frequency count was not made on one of the
simple shifted alphabets; however, due allowance must be made, as in
the case of our alphabet 2, for the difference in length and for the
fact that frequency counts of this kind have been made on columns.
Patty’s graph, so far, is representing only the shifted normal
alphabet; that is, the cipher alphabets belonging to Vigenère,
variant, and Gronsfeld ciphers. If its horizontal lines be made very
heavy, and retraced on the opposite side of the strip, and if the
letters be written on that side, opposite exactly the same horizontal
lines as before, the reverse side of the strip will furnish another
graph for identifying the reversed alphabets of the Beaufort cipher.
Other graphs can be prepared for other kinds of alphabets. For
instance, a graph suitable for examining a series of Porta frequency
counts could be made in two halves, each of double length; the
_A_-to-_M_ half would serve for comparison with the _N_-to-_Z_
halves of the frequency counts, and vice versa.


                        Figure 106

         Another Tabulation for Finding the Period   EDWIN LINDQUIST

  Repeated   Interval    List of all PRIME Factors.....
  Sequence                2     3     5     7    11....(Etc.)

    J C V       24       111    1
    C V         13
    D D V       36       11     11
    D S         12       11     1
    S S          8       111
    D T J       60       11     1     1
    T J         48       1111   1

  This was based on a cryptogram whose period was 12.  The PRIME
  FACTOR 2 is obviously included twice, and the PRIME FACTOR 3 once.


  * * *

The Vigenère cipher, and, in particular, the Kasiski method of
solution, have given rise to much research among members of the
American Cryptogram Association. We doubt that any of this research
has ever resulted in any new or valuable discovery. Yet it is
interesting in that it shows a body of amateurs arriving at devices
which are fully as effective or convenient as those proposed by
seasoned cryptanalysts. Carter’s “discovery,” for instance, which we
saw in Fig. 90, was purely his own device; at that time, he had never
heard of the “probable word method” proposed by Commandant Bazeries,
one of the greatest of modern cryptanalysts. A great many of the
first suggestions were directed at methods for making the
trigram-search less tedious; these were largely duplications of a
same idea, involving the use either of a tableau or of a slide; one
example will be shown in the next chapter. The use of graphs, also,
was a sort of simultaneous “invention.” As to Kasiski processes, while
Ohaver’s tabulation had been published, it had been out of print and
was not available for several years. The only information to be had
was the fact that a period could be discovered by factoring intervals
between repetitions, and Edwin Lindquist, finding this rather vague,
devised for his own use the tabulation which is shown as Fig. 106.
This tabulation was made from a cryptogram in which the period was 12.
Lindquist, instead of preparing columns for all possible factors,
prepared them only for _prime factors_, the repeated sequences and
their separating intervals being listed in about the same way as in
Ohaver’s tabulation. Now, taking one of the intervals, as 24: Tally
in column 2, and the interval is reduced to 12. Tally again in column
2, and the interval is reduced to 6. Tally again in column 2, and the
interval is reduced to 3, which is itself a prime factor. Tally a
final time in column 3, and the interval 24 has been reduced to its
prime factors. This process is almost entirely mental, and _very
rapid_. Examining the results: Columns 2 and 3 are very full,
indicating that prime factors 2 and 3 are both included in the period.
But in column 3, the tallies are largely single, indicating that this
factor is included only once in the period; while, in column 2, the
tallies are largely in pairs, indicating that this factor is probably
included twice in the period; had it been included three times, it
would have shown up oftener in threes. Conclusion: The period is
2 x 2 x 3, which is 12. This tabulation will be found fully as
convenient as Ohaver’s, and its results fully as accurate.


                               Figure 107

               The "SHIFT" Method for Identifying Alphabet 4   EDWIN LINDQUIST

  Letters apparently of the high-frequency class:    I  O  P  U

  Their possible originals................E   T   A   O   N   I   R   S   H
      Amount of SHIFT if I  represents..  4  15   8  20  21   0  17  16   1*
         "   "    "   "  O      "     .. 10  21  14   0   1*  6  23  22   7
         "   "    "   "  P      "     .. 11  22  15   1*  2   7  24  23   8
         "   "    "   "  U      "     .. 18   1*  20  6   7  12   3   2  13

  A SHIFT of 1  (the B-alphabet) makes all four of these letters the
         substitutes for high-frequency originals.  It almost certainly
         the shift which was made.


Mr. Lindquist also developed his own method for identifying alphabets.
This method, which, in theory, is _graphic_, is not particularly
applicable to the kind of alphabets we have been considering; that is,
it would not be needed when there is so much material. But for shorter
examples, where alphabets contain only ten or fifteen letters each, it
comes close to being that magical thing referred to by Lamb, a
“mechanical crypt-solver.” This method can be examined in Fig. 107,
where it is being applied to our so-far unidentified alphabet 4. An
examination of this alphabet 4 (of Fig. 105) shows that it has four
letters of more prominence than the rest: _I_, _O_, _P_, _U_. These
letters, or most of them, should represent high-frequency originals;
and our method consists in examining them collectively in order to
find out what amount of “shift” must have taken place in order that
some four of the letters _E T A O N I R S H_ would have resulted in
these four particular substitutes. The word “shift” is best understood
by picturing the movement of the lower alphabet on a Saint-Cyr slide.
If the two _A_’s are together, this is the starting position, and the
“amount of shift” is zero. If the _B_-alphabet be moved into position,
we have a _shift of 1_; if the _C_-alphabet be moved into position,
we have a _shift of 2_; and so on. These “shift-numbers,” 0 to 25,
can be written below the letters of the sliding alphabet.

Now, considering only one of our letters, _I_: If this is the
substitute for _e_, the normal alphabet was shifted 4 positions; if
it is the substitute for _t_, the amount of shift was 15; if it is
the substitute for _a_, the amount of shift was 8; and so on through
the rest of the nine letters belonging to the high-frequency group.
Finally, having considered our letter _I_ as the substitute for all
nine of these possibilities, we arrive at a _series of nine
shift-numbers_: 4-15-8-20-21-0-17-16-1. And unless one of these is
the correct shift, the cryptogram-letter I does not represent a
high-frequency letter at all. In the figure, this examination has
been made for all four of the letters _I_, _O_, _P_, and _U_, and
opposite each of these we have the resulting series of nine
shift-numbers. A comparison of the four series of numbers will show
that _each one includes a shift of 1_. A shift of 1, then, that is,
the _B_-alphabet, would have caused all four of our cryptogram-letters
to become substitutes for high-frequency originals. This is almost
certainly the shift which was made; but should the assumption prove
incorrect, then a shift of 7 has appeared in three of the lines, and
the _H_-alphabet would be the next choice. Lindquist’s method was
found so effective for cases of scant material, that two members of
the Association, M. R. Collins and Helen S. Pearson, decided,
independently of each other, to set it up in permanent form, so as
to avoid fresh computations for each new cryptogram.


                                  Figure 108

Tableau Showing SHIFTS for Each Letter of the Alphabet - (MORRIS  R.  COLLINS)

For VIGENÈRE                                                      For BEAUFORT

       E  T  A  O  N  I  R  S  H             E  T  A  O  N  I  R  S  H 

      22  7  0 12 13 18  9  8 19      A      4 19  0 14 13  8 17 18  7
      23  8  1 13 14 19 10  9 20      B      5 20  1 15 14  9 18 19  8
      24  9  2 14 15 20 11 10 21      C      6 21  2 16 15 10 19 20  9
      25 10  3 15 16 21 12 11 22      D      7 22  3 17 16 11 20 21 10
       0 11  4 16 17 22 13 12 23      E      8 23  4 18 17 12 21 22 11
       1 12  5 17 18 23 14 13 24      F      9 24  5 19 18 13 22 23 12
       2 13  6 18 19 24 15 14 25      G     10 25  6 20 19 14 23 24 13
       3 14  7 19 20 25 16 15  0      H     11  0  7 21 20 15 24 25 14
       4 15  8 20 21  0 17 16  1      I     12  1  8 22 21 16 25  0 15
       5 16  9 21 22  1 18 17  2      J     13  2  9 23 22 17  0  1 16
       6 17 10 22 23  2 19 18  3      K     14  3 10 24 23 18  1  2 17
       7 18 11 23 24  3 20 19  4      L     15  4 11 25 24 19  2  3 18
       8 19 12 24 25  4 21 20  5      M     16  5 12  0 25 20  3  4 19
       9 20 13 25  0  5 22 21  6      N     17  6 13  1  0 21  4  5 20
      10 21 14  0  1  6 23 22  7      O     18  7 14  2  1 22  5  6 21
      11 22 15  1  2  7 24 23  8      P     19  8 15  3  2 23  6  7 22
      12 23 16  2  3  8 25 24  9      Q     20  9 16  4  3 24  7  8 23
      13 24 17  3  4  9  0 25 10      R     21 10 17  5  4 25  8  9 24
      14 25 18  4  5 10  1  0 11      S     22 11 18  6  5  0  9 10 25
      15  0 19  5  6 11  2  1 12      T     23 12 19  7  6  1 10 11  0
      16  1 20  6  7 12  3  2 13      U     24 13 20  8  7  2 11 12  1
      17  2 21  7  8 13  4  3 14      V     25 14 21  9  8  3 12 13  2
      18  3 22  8  9 14  5  4 15      W      0 15 22 10  9  4 13 14  3
      19  4 23  9 10 15  6  5 16      X      1 16 23 11 10  5 14 15  4
      20  5 24 10 11 16  7  6 17      Y      2 17 24 12 11  6 15 16  5
      21  6 25 11 12 17  8  7 18      Z      3 18 25 13 12  7 16 17  6
                                                                       
                                                                              
Collins’ device took the form of a tableau, as shown in Fig. 108. In
this figure, the vertical alphabet running through the center is a
list of possible cryptogram-letters. On the side marked “Vigenère,”
the four lines of numbers standing beside the letters _I_, _O_, _P_,
and _U_, are the same as those included in Fig. 107. It will be
noticed that only the first line of numbers (opposite _A_) need be
found from the slide; after that, each column is a series 0 to 25.
The same is true with reference to the Beaufort shifts. These,
incidentally, were computed on the assumption that the Beaufort keys,
_A_, _B_, _C_, _D_. . . . . . . are passing in their normal
alphabetical order beneath the stationary _A_ (as most of us prepare
the Beaufort slide, this is backward). Fig. 109 shows a similar
tableau prepared for the Porta shifts. The zero-position here is the
_AB_-alphabet, a shift of 1 is the _CD_-alphabet, and so on. Collins,
however, did not use the shift-numbers. _He increased these by 1_,
using numbers 1 to 26, which represent the 26 positions of the slide,
or, better, the serial positions in the normal alphabet of the 26
key-letters. Others who have since prepared similar tableaux have
dispensed altogether with numbers, and have used the key-letters
themselves. Doing this, the first row of the Vigenère portion will
show the nine key-letters _W H A M N S J I T_, the second row will
show key-letters, _X I B N O T K J U_, and so on. If the letters
appearing on the slide have been numbered, one method is fully as
convenient as the other, though in dealing with a plaintext key one
would probably prefer the letters. In any case, where some four
letters, such as our _I O P U_ of the foregoing alphabet, have been
found more than once in a given frequency count, it is merely
necessary to find these four letters one by one in the vertical
alphabet and _copy_ their accompanying numbers. It is even possible,
having these three tableaux, to decide whether the frequency counts
taken from a periodic cryptogram represent the alphabets of the
Vigenère, the Beaufort, or the Porta.


                         Figure 109

             Tableau Showing SHIFTS for PORTA

   E   A   I   H                 T   O   N   R   S   

   9   0   5   6    N            6   1   0   4   5    A
  10   1   6   7    O            5   0  12   3   4    B
  11   2   7   8    P            4  12  11   2   3    C
  12   3   8   9    Q            3  11  10   1   2    D
   0   4   9  10    R            2  10   9   0   1    E
   1   5  10  11    S            1   9   8  12   0    F
   2   6  11  12    T            0   8   7  11  12    G
   3   7  12   0    U           12   7   6  10  11    H
   4   8   0   1    V           11   6   5   9  10    I
   5   9   1   2    W           10   5   4   8   9    J
   6  10   2   3    X            9   4   3   7   8    K
   7  11   3   4    Y            8   3   2   6   7    L
   8  12   4   5    Z            7   2   1   5   6    M
                                                       

Miss Pearson’s device took the form of _strips_, a set of 26 for each
of the three ciphers. Fig. 110 shows the first five of her Vigenère
set as she originally prepared them, using the “position-numbers,”
which are all larger by 1 than those of the tableau. Aside from this,
each strip represents one row from the Vigenère half of Collins’
tableau. But where Collins had arranged his numbers according to the
frequencies of the nine possible originals (so that possibilities
found on the left might have more significance than others found on
the right), Miss Pearson arranged hers in straight numerical order,
and spaced them in such a way that No. 1 is always in the first
column, No. 2 is always in the second column, and so on. Had she used
key-letters, all _A_’s would have been in the first column, all _B_’s
in the second column, and so on. As to the use of these strips:
Presuming that the four leading cryptogram-letters are the same as
before, simply pick out the four strips which are headed by the
letters _I_, _O_, _P_, and _U_, and set them together. If any of the
numbers are duplicated, _you will find them standing in the same
column_. These, remember, are the devices of amateurs, and both will
be found very effective. It will be noticed that the basis is the
finding of key-letters (or numbers) and not the identification of
cipher alphabets.

Now compare these devices with a method proposed by an expert, in
which the basis is the identification of cipher alphabets, and not
their keys: With this method, a tableau is prepared (which could be
arranged like the one of Fig. 85) in which the only letters shown on
any one line are the substitutes for the nine high-frequency letters.
If, for instance, the tableau is intended for the Vigenère cipher,
the top row will contain only the letters _A E H I N O R S T_, _and
the other 17 positions will be left blank_. The second row will
contain only the letters _B F I J O P S T U_, the third will contain
only the letters _C G J K P Q T U V_, and so on. Or, if the tableau
is intended for the Beaufort cipher, the top row will contain only
the letters _A W T S N M J I H_, the second row only the letters
_B X U T O N K J I_, and so on. Thus, after having taken a series of
frequency counts, we may find out, in each of these frequency counts,
which are its leading letters, then consult the prepared tableau to
find out which of its alphabets will show these same leading letters.
An added suggestion is as follows: Prepare the tableau, as described,
using black ink. Then, using red ink, add to each alphabet the
substitutes for _J K Q X Z_ (perhaps, also, for _B P V W_); that is,
the substitutes for those letters which ought to be largely _absent_.
This makes it much easier to decide between two alphabets in which
the more frequent letters have made it seem that one is as likely as
the other. It will be found that letters of low or moderate frequency
are ordinarily as helpful in these ciphers as those of high-frequency;
an instance has been pointed out in which those of the cryptogram can
be more so: Where the question is one of deciding between two possible
periods, a new tabulation can be made using only the sequences found
in connection with those letters which are less frequent in the
cryptogram than others, and thus not so sure to belong to more than
one alphabet.


                                      Figure 110

                            Strips for Determining SHIFTS          HELEN S. PEARSON

  SET FOR VIGENÈRE                                                                 
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _
   A  1  _  _  _  _  _  _  8  9 10  _  _ 13 14  _  _  _  _ 19 20  _  _ 23  _  _  _
  =================================================================================
   _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _
   B  _  2  _  _  _  _  _  _  9 10 11  _  _ 14 15  _  _  _  _ 20 21  _  _ 24  _  _
  =================================================================================
   _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _
   C  _  _  3  _  _  _  _  _  _ 10 11 12  _  _ 15 16  _  _  _  _ 21 22  _  _ 25  _
  =================================================================================
   _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _
   D  _  _  _  4  _  _  _  _  _  _ 11 12 13  _  _ 16 17  _  _  _  _ 23 24  _  _ 26
  =================================================================================
   _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _  _
   E  1  _  _  _  5  _  _  _  _  _  _ 12 13 14  _  _ 17 18  _  _  _  _ 24 25  _  _
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------

  NOTE:  The numbers here are POSITION-numbers, instead of SHIFT-numbers.  A
  shift of zero is "position 1" of a slide.  This is also the numerical, or
  serial, position of A in the normal alphabet.  Most members of the American
  Cryptogram Association prefer to dispense with numbers, and use key-letters.


We have seen, then, what can be done in place of the trigram-search in
the case of those longer cryptograms. Having one of only 170 letters,
we first found out its period, and then (presuming that we accepted
the _B_-alphabet in the case of alphabet 4), found out all five of
its key-letters _J A C B H_, and even the type of encipherment
(obviously Gronsfeld), _without having deciphered a single letter of
its message_. We are now in a position to go back and investigate any
which are still unsolved. With Vigenère methods and principles
thoroughly understood, the student is fully in possession of methods
for dealing with any periodic cipher whatever _in which he knows what
the cipher alphabets are_. All that remains, then, is to pick up a
few loose ends, and observe a few variations from the strictly
periodic encipherment, after which we may consider the case of the
unknown cipher alphabets.


116.  By NEMO.  (A Vigenère?  Or a snare and a delusion?)

W L P C V   M O G K E   E I F M U   R W W F H   V M F F W   E Y X A V   U B I C Z
O J M L C   H V X Y F   K S C U S   X I L M G   B Q I D B   W I F G B   I Q Z G Z
H F J Y P   M K I G V   P T W Y K   W Z H W M   Z H W I F   A P S D N   W F H E D
S C X A V   O E B Y Y   O K C O Y   U I H U J   L H U D X   P P W V V   H P F W Y
L G F B V   E J M A A   G B P I E   B A V U V   Q L Z N L   P W A J W.

117.  By NEON.  (U.S.Army Cipher Disk.  Surely not an advertisement?)

D J T X J   M H L M K   O M F D T   F N E U I   G D D N A   A U S N S   A C F G Y
M Z Y A Q   A N M W U   W S R B R   F J J Q S   K A Y B A   N B L T O   J E R K S
N W X A G  T J L Z Y  S T V A R  B X L K N  R L V D U  U F O F A  K Z L W Y  T E E W.

118.  By TITOGI.  (What!  Another Vigenère?  Some collusion here!)

D W P W Z   T C G H H   Z B B V W   F B H I F   W Q B L L   J D Z R G   U M M E S
W B D W L   J K X I F   Y Z D G K   Y I O I K   D W P M F   H C M S F   Q G C E L
J I I H W   A M I W L   J Z I W S   W K V W E.

119.  By THE ADMIRAL.  (Vigenère).

N S R V K   D K S I W   J W Y C E   C E G K C   E B D K N   Q Y S J U   L X Z O L
X P S U V   U T F B S   O I N P C   R R E U Y   O N U F K   H K Z D D   O J P Q Z
C K J I E   N A F J D   W B U S J   U R C L C   J C E P C   O K T V F   A F P Y X
G K K Y Z   V.

120.  By THE ADMIRAL.  (Beaufort).

Z N J L N   Y H C Z D   A U D D Z   I N H R C   Z Y Z K H   G B P E C   L M L W Y
R O I J Q   D T L Q O   Z H Q S N   D V E S E   P E J O Y   L S Z O J   U P G T K
J F K C U   W N S H G   W F D T M   G K K D W   E H L Z R   N S B G V   E S R A U
K K U M J   Z M T K N   K F Q L G   K C U P Z   U S D L W   D E Z U B   D Y F O D.

121.  By DOR.  (Another "Aristocrat." - Not hard.  No keyword).

A B C D E F G C   H G I J A   K G F D J F B L M   E D M M I M G B A   N F L C
L O G J P N F   D R F C L N.   O G P I M   S D A N   T D L I F U.   F C B G
N B P J   E G J F C L E F,   K C G A I E D   V B F.




CHAPTER XV
Miscellaneous Phases of Vigenère Decryptment

When a Vigenère cryptogram is very short, its alphabets are no longer
readily identified by their graphic appearance. But its period, in
the majority of cases, can still be determined, and it still remains
true that the identification of one letter identifies a whole
alphabet. The example of Fig. 111 contains only 30 letters. With this
cryptogram in the form shown at (a), we are still dependent upon the
search for trigrams and short words, but the case is modified by the
presence of a repeated trigram. Unless this repetition, _ZIL_, is
accidental, it indicates a maximum period of 12, and the cryptogram
is long enough to provide another interval 12, with another trigram,
_EUK_, upon which any key-fragment brought out at _ZIL_ can be tested
in order to see whether or not it will bring out another good
sequence. When it finally does, the intermediate trigrams (those at
intervals 6 or 4) can be tried, in the hope of finding a shorter
period.


                                 Figure 111

  (a)                                          (b)
     Z I L T F   R U I Y T   J R Z I L            1  2  3  4  5  6
       x             x             x              Z  I  L  T  F  R
                                                  U  I  Y  T  J  R
       K A R O I   E A O A E   U K L W K.         Z  I  L  K  A  R
               x                                  O  I  E  A  O  A
                                                  E  U  K  L  W  K


But assuming a case in which we have no repeated sequences at all, we
almost never meet with a Vigenère cryptogram in which there are no
_repeated single letters belonging to a same cipher alphabet_. These
repeated single letters can be tabulated with their separating
intervals, _and these intervals factored in exactly the same way as
intervals between repeated sequences_. The evidence, perhaps, will be
less clear, and less reliable, than that obtained through repeated
sequences; as with sequences, the less frequent letters will usually
be more informative than those which are leaders. To illustrate, with
our given example, the single letter _I_ has shown the interval 6
three times, the single letter _R_ has shown it twice, and the single
letters _L_ and _Z_ have shown its multiple. In the average case, the
period will not be so clearly evident as here; however, the example
was not in any way manipulated in order to produce this evidence.

Once the cryptogram of (a) can be rearranged as at (b), we no longer
have before us the piecemeal decipherments and piecemeal tests which
are necessary where a period is likely to be anything at all.
Whatever key-fragments can be brought out at _ZIL_, or on another
trigram, need be tested only on the three columns which contain the
trigram. Even presuming that the evidence has been inconclusive
between two or more periods, the cryptogram, necessarily a short one,
can be written into each of these probable periods, and the two or
more resulting blocks, standing side by side, can be considered more
or less simultaneously. Here, with our period determined as 6, the
columns of (b) are very short, and the number of trials and erasures
should not be many.

For this kind of case, however, many solvers have a preference for
the purely mechanical method which is detailed in Fig. 112. _Sheet 1_
of this figure has been prepared from the first column of our
cryptogram, which included the letters _Z U Z O E_. _Sheet 2_ has
been prepared from the second column, which included the letters
_I I I I U_; and _sheet 3_ has been prepared from the third column,
which included the letters _L Y L E K_. In each case, the column of
cryptogram letters, as it first stands, is also the _A_-decipherment.
With each letter used as a point of beginning, a series of normal
alphabets may be laid out, as in the figure, and the resulting 25
new columns on every sheet will show the other 25 possible
decipherments. But if these decipherments have been caused to
progress in the normal alphabetical direction, and if the cipher is
Vigenère, the key-letters which produce these deciphered columns will
have to run backward in the alphabet. These can be added at the tops
or bottoms of their columns, and can, if desired, be written in red
ink, or otherwise distinguished.


                                Figure 112

  Sheet No. 1  (For Column 1 of b, preceding figure)

        KEYS:     a z y x w v u t s r q p o n m l k j i h g f e d c b
                  Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
                  U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T
                  Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
                  O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N
                  E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D

  Sheet No. 2  (For Column 2 of b, preceding figure)

        KEYS:     a z y x w v u t s r q p o n m l k j i h g f e d c b
                  I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H
                  I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H
                  I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H
                  I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H
                  U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T

  Sheet No. 3  (For Column 3 of b, preceding figure)

        KEYS:     a z y x w v u t s r q p o n m l k j i h g f e d c b
                  L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K
                  Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
                  L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K
                  E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D
                  K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J


Fig. 113 shows what modifications would be necessary if the sheets
were being prepared for one of the Beauforts. For the variant
Beaufort, the only difference lies in the fact that key-letters must
progress in the same alphabetical direction as their decipherments.
With the true Beaufort, however, the making of an _A_-decipherment
does not mean a simple copying of cryptogram letters, as in the other
two ciphers; this _A_-decipherment must first be made; after that,
the series of normal alphabets can be extended as before, and the
key-letters will progress in the same alphabetical direction as their
deciphered columns.

Now, assuming that these sheets have actually been prepared, say on
quadrille paper, the various columns of decipherment may be examined,
and a check-mark placed beside each column in which the series of
letters appears to represent a “good” decipherment. With longer
columns, those may be checked which contain the largest percentages
of letters _E T A O N I R S H_, without too many of the letters
_J K Q X Z_; with shorter columns, perhaps those are “best” in which
any repeated letters are chiefly vowels, it being remembered that
when the cryptogram contains repeated sequences, as well as repeated
single letters, the possible identity of these repeated digrams or
trigrams must also be taken into consideration. With all of the
apparently good columns checked for attention, _sheet 1_ may be
creased vertically so as to place any desired column on the extreme
right, and this column may then be laid directly against any desired
column of _sheet 2_ for an observation of the resulting digrams. If
these appear to be satisfactory, then _sheet 2_ may also be creased
vertically, and the series of apparently good digrams may be laid
directly against any desired column of _sheet 3_ for an observation
of the resulting trigrams. And so on, if desired, to a possible
_sheet 4_, or _5_, or _6_, though, as a rule, the first three sheets
will be found sufficient. While the method, as indicated, is intended
to be mechanical, that is, largely visual, it would be possible,
where uncertainty exists between two given combinations, to copy
these and subject them to a digram test. But this should not be
necessary in a case where key-letters, as well as their deciphered
columns, are expected to set up good combinations in order to form a
plaintext key-word.


                                Figure 113

  If column Z U Z O E were VARIANT:     If column Z U Z O E were BEAUFORT:

    KEYS:   a b c d e f g .....           KEYS:   a b c d e f g ..... 
            Z A B C D E F .....               Z - B C D E F G H .....
            U V W X Y Z A .....               U - G H I J K L M .....
            Z A B C D E F .....               Z - B C D E F G H .....
            O P Q R S T U .....               O - M N O P Q R S .....
            E F G H I J K .....               E - W X Y Z A B C .....


An interesting version of this method, as shown by Admiral Elliott
Snow, included the following variations: To begin with, in extending
the alphabets, the decryptor omits altogether the letters
_J K Q X Z_, and perhaps one or two others of extremely low
frequency, simply leaving the blank spaces which indicate their
alphabetical positions. This makes the work more rapid, and, in
addition, the presence of these blank spaces in any column of
decipherment, advertises at once that the column is probably not a
very good one. But Admiral Snow’s columns were not columns; they were
_rows_. A given series of letters: as _Z U Z O E_ of our foregoing
_sheet 1_, is laid out horizontally, and its decipherments are
extended vertically. The spacing on each row is arranged to
correspond with the period; that is, the letters _Z U Z O E_, instead
of being continuous, are spaced six columns apart if the period is 6,
and their decipherments, of course, are spaced in the same way. The
sheets may now be creased horizontally between rows, and one sheet
placed against another in such a way that the resulting digrams are
all standing on diagonals, but have appeared at exactly their
cryptogram distance apart. The student should experiment with both
arrangements and decide which one he likes.

It has been pointed out by C. A. Castle, another of our members, that
the foregoing method will find its chief application, not on a single
cryptogram, but as applied to a case which, so far, we have not
considered in connection with the substitution ciphers: One in which
the decryptor has in his possession five or six cryptograms, all very
brief, but all enciphered with the same key. Here, we have the common
practical case, to be handled in somewhat the same way as the last of
our transposition examples; the cryptograms can be written one below
another, thus forming a series of columns in which every column has
been enciphered with the same cipher alphabet. If this case happens
to involve a comparatively short period, it is possible to take
intervals between repeated sequences found in two different
cryptograms, using the intervals indicated by the number of columns
between the first letter of one sequence and the first letter of its
repetition. Castle’s example, however, was not based on a short key,
but upon an extremely long one, and his five or six messages were
merely fragments, each one of which was _known to be the beginning
of an English sentence_. In the English language, about half of all
initial letters used are found in the group _T A O S H I_ and more
than another one-fourth are found in the group _W C B P F D M_. Thus,
having a series of beginnings in which the first column will include
only initial letters, the number of truly acceptable decipherments
on any _sheet 1_ will usually be quite limited. In addition, with
vowels known to have a fondness for second and third positions in
words, there should be little difficulty in selecting decipherments
from _sheets 2_ and _3_.

  * * *

While we have described this device as having been written out on
sheets of paper, there are many persons who prefer to have at hand
a series of cardboard strips which will set up the “sheets”
mechanically. If each of the strips carries the normal alphabet
written twice in succession, it is possible to adjust five of the
strips so as to place the letters _Z U Z O E_ one below another in
the form of a column and automatically set up the other 25 columns.
The strips can be loose, or may form part of a slide. Slides, in
fact, may be used for many purposes, and are well worth preparing
for any kind of cipher which the decryptor expects to encounter a
great many times. The members of the American Cryptogram Association,
who solve a great many Vigenères, Beauforts, and so on, as a matter
of recreation, have practically all “invented” slides (or tableaux)
which will, to some extent, do away with the irksome task of carrying
out a trigram-search. These are prepared in various ways, and
variously used, though the principle for all is about the same as
that indicated in Fig. 114. They are usually referred to as
_decrypting slides_, and the single stationary alphabet, sometimes a
list of key-letters and sometimes not, will be called “the decrypting
alphabet.” C. Stanley Lamb, who is by no means the only “inventor”
of the device illustrated, has this in several different forms,
according to the purpose for which he intends to use it. Notice that
the card, as we have placed it, shows the stationary single alphabet
running contrary to the others, for use on the Vigenère cipher, and
that this card need merely be reversed in order to have a single
stationary alphabet running parallel to the others, for use on the
two Beauforts. As to the sliding double alphabets, there may be as
many of these as the operator feels like setting up; if the device
is being used to assist in the trigram search, three will be needed.


                                     Figure 114

                           One Form of "DECRYPTING SLIDE"         C. STANLEY LAMB

  For VIGENÈRE, the "Decrypting Alphabet" runs backward:

                     | a z y x w v u t s r q p o n m l k j i h g f e d c b |  
      (  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H ...
              (  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E ...
        (  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I ...
                     | z y x w v u t s r q p o n m l k j i h g f e d c b a |

  As this is shown, it has been set for the decipherment of a trigram  H D G,  and
  every possible decipherment can be read from the slide without changing its
  present adjustment.  The entire list of frequent trigrams can be used as trial keys:

  Trial Keys:           T H E  A N D  T H A  E N T  I O N  T I O  F O R  (Etc.)
                        H D G
  Fragment of True Key: O W C  H Q D  O W G  D Q N  Z P T  O V S  C P P (Etc.)


To explain its use: The decryptor here is dealing with a sheet of
trigrams. Each one of these trigrams is to be deciphered as _THE_,
_AND_, _THA_, and so on, following the list of normally frequent
trigrams, and the resulting key-fragments are to be written down for
comparison with one another, in the hope that some two or more will
be duplicates, or will contain overlapping letters. The first of
these cipher trigrams is _HDG_. These three cipher-letters, found on
the three slides, are placed, in order, below _A_. Now, on the first
of the slides, every possible decipherment for _H_ is standing
opposite its key-letter, found in the “decrypting alphabet”; on the
second slide, every possible decipherment for _D_ is standing
opposite the the proper key-letter; and on the third slide, every
possible decipherment for G. To know, then, what key-letters will be
deciphered by _THE_, find _T_ on the first slide and note key-letter
_O_; find _H_ on the second slide and note key-letter _W_; find _E_
on the third slide and note key-letter _C_; the complete key-fragment
is _OWC_. This may be written down, Then, _without changing the
adjustment of the device_: For _AND_, key-fragment _HQD_, and so on
down the list.

Where the cipher is Vigenère, the text-letters may be found in the
“decrypting alphabet” and their keys on the slides, without changing
results. But with either of the Beauforts, a key is specifically a
key and not a text-letter. Thus, when the card is reversed, and the
same process applied for one of the Beauforts, the student must be
careful as to where he finds his letters _T H E_ in each of the two
ciphers. This peculiar relationship of Vigenère-variant-Beaufort is
not hard to untangle if all three of the encipherments are considered
to be purely mathematical operations of addition and subtraction. If
we must add two numbers, as 5 and 10, it makes no difference whether
we call it the sum of 5 plus 10 or the sum of 10 plus 5. But where we
must perform a subtraction, there are two separate cases.

In straight Vigenère encipherment, the process is _addition_, in which
text-letters may be considered to have the values 1 to 26 (their
serial positions in the normal alphabet), while key-letters may be
considered to have the values 0 to 25 (the amount of alphabetical
shift represented by each one). Thus, the encipherment of _J_ by _P_
(10 plus 15) will not result differently from the encipherment of
_P_ by _J_ (16 plus 9); in both cases, we obtain _Y_, alphabetical
value 25.

In variant Beaufort, we have one of the _subtractions_: _Message
minus key_, with the occasional necessity for “borrowing” 26 in order
to make a subtraction possible. Thus, _J_ enciphered by _P_ (10 minus
15) does not give the same result as _P_ enciphered by _J_ (16 minus
9). In the first case (after borrowing 26), we obtain _U_, or 21,
while in the other case we obtain _G_, or 7.

In the true Beaufort, we have the other _subtraction_: _Key minus
message_. This time, we value the key-letters 1 to 26, and the
text-letters 0 to 25. Thus, _J_ enciphered by _P_ (9 taken from 16)
results in _G_, or 7, while _P_ enciphered by _J_ (16 taken from 9)
results in _U_, or 21. Our results, then, are exactly the reverse of
those obtained in the other subtraction.

If these mathematical comparisons be understood, or simply kept in
mind, it will always be possible, whenever a decryptment process has
been explained in connection with only one of the encipherments, to
examine its “mathematical” details and learn from these in just what
respects it would have to be modified in order that it may be applied
with equal success to the other two encipherments. There is another
interesting possibility which may have escaped the student’s notice.
If he will turn back to Fig. 98, in which the same message, using the
same key, was enciphered in both of the Beauforts, one encipherment
coming out as _K K Z B B I Z_. . . . . and the other as
_Q Q B Z Z S B_. . . . . , he will notice that these two cryptograms
are complementary from beginning to end. If we saw any reason for
doing so, we might convert either one of the Beaufort cryptograms to
the other form, and apply its probable word with its own slide.

  * * *

Now, having seen the great vulnerability of the famous “indecipherable
cipher,” suppose we glance at some of the devices which have been used
for doing away with its periodicity. One such device, that of
_auto-encipherment_ (_autokey_, _autoclave_), has been given its own
separate chapter (the one immediately following), not because of its
value as a cipher, but because of the very interesting decryptment
problem it presents. A second device, the details of which may be
examined in Fig. 115, consists in the use of a very long nonrepeating
key, the popular name for which is “running key.” The value of such a
key, for practical purposes, we have already seen; it was a key of
this kind which Castle had used on his five or six
cryptogram-beginnings. In single examples, however, it gives more
trouble. Unless there is a probable word, its message and key must be
dug out bit by bit, and if the encipherment is Vigenère, any recovered
fragments can belong equally well to the message or to the key.
However, with its key known to be purely plaintext, no fragments need
be considered except those which are usable combinations, and since
the “running key cipher” makes a fascinating puzzle, a specimen has
been included among the practice cryptograms. The original of this,
apparently, was the Hermann cipher. This employed a slide which was
identical with the Saint-Cyr slide except that the stationary alphabet
carried an extra cell (position) marked “index” to be used instead of
the Saint-Cyr index _A_. As the writer saw this, the index-cell was
standing just ahead of _A_, so that the resulting encipherment would
have been that of a Saint-Cyr slide on which the letter _Z_ was
serving as index-letter.


                    Figure 115

          Vigenère with a "Running Key"

  Key-letters:        M Y C O U N T R Y T I S ...
  Plaintext letters:  S E N D S U P P L I E S ...
  Cryptogram:         E C P R M H I G J B M K ...


Of other devices aimed at destroying periodicity, quite a few have
been based in some way on _key-interruption_. A key-word is selected,
as INDEPENDENCE, but the encipherer breaks off before completely using
his rotation, so that the completed cryptogram will be enciphered very
irregularly by such a key as INDEP INDEPEND I IN INDEPENDENC IND
INDEPEN. . . . . . Sometimes this is found as a word-spacing device,
the key beginning over with each new word, though naturally not with
word-separations showing in the cryptograms. But in the average case,
the key-interruption takes place at the discretion of the encipherer;
sometimes the agreement with his correspondent allows him to break
off as he pleases without any sort of signal, leaving the decipherer
to discover the interruptions through the fact that he can no longer
decipher; again, he may use an indicator, as _J_. In the latter case,
he must encipher any _J_’s which may happen to occur in his message
by using the _I_-substitute; then, whenever he decides to break the
key, he first enciphers a _J_. Thus, whenever the decipherer brings
out the letter _J_, he knows that his key is to begin over with the
encipherment of the next letter. It will be noticed that in all of
these cases, the decipherer will have to do his work one letter at
a time.

There is another of these devices which apparently destroys
periodicity and is aimed at throwing all of this onerous work upon
the shoulders of the decryptor without at the same time punishing the
legitimate decipherer. This consists in shortening the two alphabets
of the key, so as to leave some extra letter, which will never be used
in any cryptogram. Encipherment, in this case, is accomplished in the
regular way, producing a periodic cryptogram. The extra letter may
then be inserted at points throughout the cryptogram wherever it can
do the most harm. The decipherer, knowing that this one letter is
always null, need merely erase it. But if this device is to be really
useful, the omitted letter must not be always the same, and this
trouble can be overcome as follows: In the shortening of the plaintext
alphabet, we omit always the unwanted letter, as _J_. But in
shortening the cipher alphabet, we omit first one letter and then
another, according to agreement, and insert _J_ in its place. The
decipherer, knowing what letter is null, erases it; but the decryptor,
granting that he knows what the process is, will still have to
experiment with various letters before he learns which one (or more)
of the 26 is the null of the moment.

Shortened alphabets are not uncommon in ordinary use. We meet with
25-letter alphabets in European examples, the letter _W_ having been
omitted for telegraphic reasons. This case can usually be
distinguished from the one which precedes by the fact that the letter
_W_ is never found in a frequency count, and it presents only the
minor trouble that the ordinary 26-letter slide will not make the
decipherments, so that it becomes necessary to prepare another on
which the letter _W_ is not present. This case can, of course, be
simulated by making use of a 24-letter alphabet.

These devices, taken as a whole, have added little, if at all, to the
security of the straight-alphabet ciphers, though, for the most part,
they have succeeded admirably in rendering their ciphers totally unfit
for general purposes. Considered as single examples, they can, of
course, prove troublesome. We trust that this will not be the case
with some one or two of the appended practice cryptograms, but if so,
we recommend that the student postpone them for a later investigation.
Concerning example No. 122, he may find that some of the material
presented in Chapter XVI applies also to the “running key”
encipherment; with others, a trigram-search may assist in developing
the interrupted key-word; and in one case, a clever decryptor should
find a way for applying his Kasiski method.


122.  By SABIO.  (Vigenère with Running Key.  SENT,  AGENT,  STOP,  IMPREGNATED).

A R U N N   I N G K E   Y S O Q M   A V Q X K   L U E R S   Z S S R F   A H A I V
X W E T N   K Z Q N V   R A G W V   E T F W N   L K A T A   I B S Z U   H P E X U
B W W A S   P N F F C.    (These are a trifle tedious, but not inhuman).
                                 •   •  •  •             •  ••  •• ••

123.  By NEON.  (Porta, with key-interruption.  Plenty of trigrams!)

A P V K W   T P K P V   Y G Q P G   A K J Z W   J N I X J   U Q O U K   P V W F U
R F X N K   C K P R K   Q K W F U   R G J O V   Z O K G X   J V Q S W   T F K D L
L Y Q L X   Z E F L Y   U J V Z C   X G Q L J   M T X W K   K P V T V   B Y K X P
F J Z Q X   B V C O V   V H X Z K   J Z U Y.

124.  By WHOSIT.  (Beaufort, with key-interruption. THEY, WHEN, IN, ON, UP, etc).

M X Y F U   H P M J B   C X O C K   A L Q E D   B Q A E P   R B Z L G   L W M J B
Z Z C S A   A L A O E   K K C W L   L J B P H   U W B L F   Q O R B Z   L A O E M
A L O K F   P V H Y U   Y H Y J L   X O L X Z.

125.  By B. Natural.  (Gronsfeld, with key-interruption).

S O W H Z   G H O C V   V W L F F   F X O F H   H X Q S I   H S O Y P   P H K T Q
H Z F Y J   Q G Q H O   B X V X O   F L R J L   F W E A E   F H O G G   V O F E T
Y M U X O   F T H S N   F B U A O   B W H V C   V V H V A   O F Q M A   G V N H S
S C F U X   O F V H E   L O A O J   O E C V V   E Y F A V   S N I P L   E O U P W
T A G P Q   K E T.

126.  By TRYIT.  (Gronsfeld, with interruptors.  MY, TO, THE, OF, IS, BE, WHICH).

R H X G A   P A S R E   C Z T R T   W Z A J Z   S G Q A Z   M T P E A   U X G K Y
Z F W Z S   G Q Y O E   Y F C T P   W B G K O   D P W N D   X Z A W F   O W H T Z
B M O H K   Q P K V K   S Q N D J   Z S L Z X   L C R T T   N H S H W.

127.  By B. NATURAL.  (Vigenère.  One letter reserved as interruptor.  Look out!)

P N B Y C   A N D V N   P N F Y Z   G V N W E   J N S I T   T T Z B L   N O S L N
X R N I L   Z H N H M   D X D X B   Z N B I K   W Z H N D   J N B M D   T N O I K
N E I I H   T W Q M F   A T N P Q   U N T J W   D C X N G   I C X P Z   B L N O S
L N O I J   N O S L G   N H S C K   T Q D N X   W N R I I   I L M J T  R N U M D  T.




CHAPTER XVI
Auto-Encipherment

The term _autokey_ (_autoclave_; “the autokey cipher”), as commonly
used, refers to the kind of encipherment shown in Fig. 116, in which
a message becomes its own key for applying some one of the
multiple-alphabet ciphers — usually the Vigenère. It will be noticed
from the figure that the auto-encipherment must be “primed” with a
conventional key; and whenever the words _key-length_, _period_, and
so on, are used in connection with auto-enciphered cryptograms, their
actual reference is to the short initial key. A more accurate term
would seem to be _group-length_. But that a term is needed for
referring to something akin to the period of the ordinary Vigenère
cryptogram can be seen when we consider the mechanics of decipherment:


                                  Figure 116

  Vigenère Autokey:   C O M E T/S E N D S U P P L I E S T O M O R L E Y S
  Plaintext:          S E N D S U P P L I E S T O M O R L E Y S S T A T I
  CRYPTOGRAM:         U S Z H L M T C O A Y H I Z U S J E S K G J E E R A


Our present initial key, COMET, _key-length 5_, serves to decipher
only one _group_ of that length. The five key-letters obtained from
this first decipherment will serve to decipher only one more _group_;
from this, another five key-letters are obtained, and will decipher a
third _group_, and so on. But our _group-length_, sometimes referred
to as “period,” includes five individual series of letters, any one
of which can be enciphered and deciphered independently of the rest.
That is, beginning with _C_, or _O_, or _M_, or _E_, or _T_, and
taking each fifth letter, it is possible to proceed straight through
to the end, enciphering or deciphering only this one series, or
“column.” It will be noticed from the foregoing that the decipherer
gets the short end of the bargain. The encipherer knows in advance
what the key is, and, to some extent, can apply one cipher alphabet
at a time; the decipherer knows only the key to the first group; the
rest he must ferret out for himself.

There is, however, a second form of autokey encipherment in which the
respective difficulties of encipherer and decipherer would be
reversed. This form of auto-encipherment, which can be seen in Fig.
117, makes use of a preliminary key, as in the regular form, but
follows this with the enciphered text instead of with the plaintext.
Such an encipherment results, occasionally, from the mechanical
construction of a cipher machine, and in this case, where the 26
cipher alphabets are in mixed order, and unknown to the decryptor,
may present an interesting decryptment problem. But where the cipher
is Vigenère (or any other in which the decryptor possesses the full
set of cipher alphabets), it can hardly be argued that there is any
great problem about a cryptogram which carries its key in full view.
We will confine ourselves, then, to the usual form of autokey, as
first explained, beginning our studies with a brief glance at the two
common practical cases, that of accumulated cryptograms, and that of
probable words. Procedure, in the former case, is self-evident.
Possessing several cryptograms all initiated with the same preliminary
key, we may write their beginnings one below another to form columns,
and the first few of these columns will constitute an ordinary case
of Vigenère in which every message is known to be the beginning of a
sentence. With beginnings discovered, a little industry accomplishes
the rest.

The case of probable words, on the other hand, presents some
interesting possibilities inherent in the auto-encipherment itself.
When the probable word is short (or if a search is to be made for
normally frequent trigrams), the task of bringing out and testing the
possible key-fragments is made much less onerous by the fact of the
purely plaintext key. Being sure of an abundance of excellent
sequences, we need consider none but the very best of the deciphered
fragments; and for any one considered, the trials need be made only
within a very short range of the spot at which it was found. All of
this work may be done directly on the cryptogram. A correct sequence,
correctly applied, can be followed out in both directions, and will
yield, in full, several of the “columns,” and several consecutive
letters of the initial key. But if it so happens that the probable
word is longer than the initial key, _its first few letters must
become the keys for enciphering its last few_. Consider, for instance,
the word SIMPLICITY, which has a length of ten letters. If the
preliminary key contains only five letters, then, beginning at
-_ICITY_, the keys _SIMPL_- will begin to encipher, causing a certain
long cryptogram-sequence which, for Vigenère, will always be
_A K U I J_. If the preliminary key has six letters, the same word
causes a sequence _U Q F N_ when the cipher is Vigenère; if it has
seven letters, the cryptogram-sequence will be _A B K_; and even an
eight-letter key brings out one certain digram, _L G_. Thus, knowing
what the cipher is, and having at our disposal any comparatively long
probable words, we may write out these sequences _in advance_ and be
ready to look for them in the cryptograms. In addition to whatever
words we consider probable, it is obvious that any other long word
may encipher itself in the same way, and, if it is one important to
the subject matter, is likely to be repeated, causing the cryptogram
to show a _long repeated sequence_. Thus, if we find a long repeated
sequence in a cryptogram, we are able to try this as a common suffix,
_TION_, _MENT_, _ENCE_, _ABLE_, etc., in the expectation of bringing
out some common prefix, _CON_, _PRE_, etc.


                            Figure 117

       Key:   C O M E T/  U S Z H L   O H O S T   .....
              S E N D S   U P P L I   E S T O M   .....
              U S Z H L   O H O S T   .....

  Note that the cryptogram itself is the key, except that the
  first five letters are missing.  To decrypt, With any
  alphabet, need merely find where to begin using it!


More fascinating, by far, than its practical aspects, however, are
the possibilities presented by the autokeyed cryptogram for analytical
attack. The devices immediately to follow are described by General
Givierge in his _Cours de cryptographie_, and are credited by him to
Commandant Bassières.

First, it is possible to discover the length of the short preliminary
key, or, at any rate, to confine this to certain definite
probabilities. This key, as we have seen, governs a definite
group-length, or “period.” If this group-length, say, is 5, then,
barring the first and final groups, every plaintext letter will be
enciphered by the letter standing five positions to its left, and
will, in its own turn, serve to encipher the one standing five
positions to its right. Since all plaintexts are filled with repeated
letters, roughly half of them separated by even intervals, it stands
to reason that there will be many occasions on which the letter
standing five positions to the left and the one standing five
positions to the right will be the same letter. That is, we must
often find the encipherment pattern of Fig. 118. Some one letter,
as _S_, is repeated at an interval of exactly twice the group-length,
with some other letter, as _R_, standing at exactly the group-length
interval from both of the _S_’s. The first _S_ enciphers _R_, and _R_
enciphers the second _S_. Or, if the repeated letter is _T_ and the
intermediate one is _L_, then _T_ enciphers _L_, and _L_ afterward
enciphers _T_. Where the cipher is Vigenère, the result, in the
cryptogram, is _a repeated letter standing at_ _exactly the
group-length interval_. If the cipher is one of the Beauforts, the
same pattern produces _a pair of complementary letters separated by
exactly the group-length interval_.


                      Figure 118

            S . . . . R                  T . . . . L
  S . . . . R . . . . S        T . . . . L . . . . T
            J . . . . J                  E . . . . E


Now, in order to consider the value of this observation, let us
examine the cryptogram of Fig. 119, an autokeyed Vigenère, which, for
convenience, is presented in groups of the correct length, 7.
According to Bassières, should we inspect this cryptogram for
repeated single letters, noting, in each case, the interval of
separation, the correct group-length, 7, will be present among those
intervals which are noted oftenest, and, in many cases, will be the
one which predominates. For making such an examination, perhaps the
simplest plan would be that of listing the possible group-lengths at
the tops of a series of columns, beginning with group-length 1 and
carrying them as far as desired. The counts could then be made by
placing a tally mark in the proper column for each time that a given
interval is noted. The results of this examination, as compared with
the Kasiski examination for a period, may be studied in Fig. 120. At
(a), where the leading intervals of our cryptogram have been listed
with their frequencies, it is noticeable that the correct group-length,
7, is not represented by the predominating interval or even by the
one which is second in frequency; it is merely present among the five
leaders. But we find other cryptograms, not necessarily of great
length, in which some one letter, as _V_, will be repeated five or
six times in succession at exactly the group-length interval, and its
evidence amply confirmed in other repetitions. Then, as at (b), we
may find some fairly good clue, leading us to give the first trial to
the correct group-length; and again we are left, clueless, to try out
five or six different group-lengths before striking the correct one.
Results, then, are variable, and the only certainty, at any rate in a
short cryptogram, is that of being able to limit the group-length to
a given few. With the group-length determined, or with one selected
for trial, we may take our choice of two processes.


                                      Figure 119

  L C N D M E E   L C N O Y G T   B G X V N D G   S S H W A W J   Q E V L H O W
  Y I J W L E X   A P V E C L B   H D Q E K U W   W G R H X J F   B D Y P I P K
  Q D W A R G U   W R L G N I Q   S L V L E S P   H E U T X B O   N D H V X D C
  O U D S J T F   J N U Q N Q L   A A I L M Z U   X I E W O B Y   I W E H P D Q


  * * *

_Process 1_ (_Bassières_). With group-length 7, as we have seen, our
cryptogram includes seven independent series, or “columns,” of letters.
By beginning at the 1st letter, and taking the 1st, 8th, 15th, 22d,
etc., letters, we may decipher _series 1_ independently of the others;
or, by beginning at the 2d letter, and taking the 2d, 9th, 16th, etc.,
letters, we may decipher _series 2_; and so with the other five series.
Many persons, before doing this, will rewrite this cryptogram into
seven _columns_, which permits that the decipherment of a series be
done straight down its column, and for that reason the word “column”
is sometimes used to describe what we have called here a “series.” In
order to understand the first of the Bassières processes, we need
consider only _series 1_, it being understood that whatever applies
to any one of the seven series applies equally well to the other six.


                             Figure 120
  (a)                                                         (b)
    Interval  8, found 8 times         Possible Reason for L C N
       "     16,   "   8  "
       "      4,   "   6  "            T H E o r e m/G E T t i..
       "      5,   "   6  "            G E T t i n g T H E b a..
       "      7,   "   6  "            Z L Y . . . . Z L Y . .


Now, considering Fig. 121: If the unknown first key-letter was _A_,
then the first plaintext letter, found by deciphering with key _A_,
was _L_, and this became the key for enciphering the eighth letter.
If the key which enciphered the eighth letter was _L_, then the
eighth letter, found by deciphering with key _L_, was _A_, and this
became the key for enciphering the fifteenth letter. Following out
this decipherment to the end of _series 1_, we find that the plaintext
letters must have been _L A B R Z Z B_, etc., as given in full in the
figure. A glance at the complete series will show that this
decipherment is not a particularly good one. If another decipherment
be carried out, on the hypothesis that the original first key-letter
was _B_, we obtain the series _K B A S Y A A_, etc., which starts out
fairly well, but which, when completed, will contain two _K_’s, one
_Z_, two _B_’s, and one _P_. If a third decipherment be carried out,
on the hypothesis that the original first key-letter was _C_, we
obtain the series _J C Z T X B Z_, etc., which is a poor decipherment
from the beginning. A trial and error method might consist in making
these decipherments one at a time directly on the cryptogram, erasing
one when it is obviously poor, and trying to add the next series
whenever one proves acceptable.


                                      Figure 121

  Keys:       A               L               A               B
              L C N D M E K   L C N O Y G T   B G X V N D G   S S H W A W J......
  Plaintext:  L               A               B               R

       Series 1, (Key A):    L A B R Z Z B G Q L F R B G H H C Y Z J.


The Bassières process, however, consists in setting up the entire 26
possible decipherments as these are shown in Fig. 122. In this figure,
the original cryptogram-letters of _series 1_ are standing in a column
at the extreme left. The 26 possible decipherments are also standing
in the form of columns, each decipherment headed by the key with which
it was initiated. If the group-length 7 is correct, then one of these
26 columns shows the original plaintext letters.

Now let us examine, not the columns, but the rows, of this tableau,
and find out just how troublesome it is going to be to prepare
tableaux of the same kind for _series 2_, _series 3_, and possibly
others. The key-letters, across the top, constitute a normal
alphabet, and below this each row contains the 26 decipherments for
some one letter of _series 1_. On the odd-numbered rows, the
decipherments for the odd-numbered letters are alphabetically
arranged, but progressing in a direction contrary to that of their
keys, as if these odd letters represented Vigenère encipherment. On
the even-numbered rows, the decipherments for the even-numbered
letters are also alphabetically arranged, but are progressing
parallel to their keys, as if these even-numbered letters might
represent variant Beaufort encipherment. Evidently, then, the
_A_-decipherment is the only one which must actually be carried out;
afterward, the preparation of the tableau is a matter of extending
alphabets. With similar tableaux prepared for the remaining six
series, we have seven sheets, and on each one of these there is one
column showing the correct decipherment of the series, headed by the
correct key-letter. Thus, our solution is to be the mechanical one
of the preceding chapter. On each one of the tableaux, the apparently
“good” decipherments may be checked for attention; the sheets may be
creased between columns, and the “good” decipherments of one tableau
may be placed directly in contact with those of another.


                                      Figure 122

  SERIES No. 1, Prepared as a Tableau.  (Corresponds to SHEET No. 1 of Figure 112).

   THE
  CIPHER                     The 26 Decipherments, with Keys
  LETTERS

                  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z (Keys)

        L         L K J I H G F E D C B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M  ←
        L         A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z    →
        B         B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C  ←
        S         R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q    →
        Q         Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B A
        Y         Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y
        A         B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C
        H         G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F
        W         Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B A Z Y X W V U T S R
        B         L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K
        Q         F E D C B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G
        W         R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q
        S         B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C
        H         G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F
        N         H G F E D C B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I
        O         H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G
        J         C B A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D
        A         Y Z A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X
        X         Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B A
        I         J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C D E F G H I


  * * *

_Process 2_ (_Bassières_). Fig. 123 shows the second of the Bassières
processes. With 7 decided upon as the group-length, we make up a
_trial key_ having the right number of _A_’s, and decipher the
cryptogram. The new cryptogram, produced in this way, is _periodic_,
and its period, for Vigenère, will be twice the group-length, in the
present case 14. In Fig. 124, where this new cryptogram has been
repeated, written into its period, it is possible to check its
periodicity: It has two repeated sequences, _C J B_ and _W G_, at
suitable intervals, and while these are very few, their evidence is
amply supported by the fact of repeated single letters in every
column. When the periodicity is not confirmed in this way, it can
be assumed that the chosen group-length was not correct.

The make-up of this new cryptogram is not hard to understand if it is
noticed that what we have done is to carry out simultaneously the
seven _A_-decipherments of seven tableaux like that of Fig. 122. We
saw there that the odd-numbered letters of a series react as Vigenère
encipherment and the even-numbered letters as variant Beaufort. With
seven _A_-decipherments made at once, the same will apply to
odd-numbered and even-numbered _groups_. Thus, our new cryptogram
has seven columns enciphered in Vigenère and another seven enciphered
in variant Beaufort. The original seven-letter initial key-word will
decipher both sets of columns; for the first seven, it must be
applied in the Vigenère manner, and, for the other seven, in the
variant Beaufort manner.


                                      Figure 123


  a a a a a a a   L C N D M E K   A A A L M C J   B G X K B B X   R M K M Z V M
  L C N D M E K   L C N O Y G T   B G X V N D G   S S H W A W J   Q E V L H O W
  L C N D M E K   A A A L M C J   B G X K B B X   R M K M Z V M   Z S L Z I T K

  Z S L Z I T K   Z Q Y X D L N   B Z X H Z A O   G E T X L U I   Q C Y K M P X
  Y I J W L E X   A P V E C L B   H D Q E K U W   W G R H X J F   B D Y P I P K
  Z Q Y X D L N   B Z X H Z A O   G E T X L U I   Q C Y K M P X   L B A F W A N

  L B A F W A N   F C W V V G H   R P P L S C J   B W G A M Q G   G I O T L L I
  Q D W A R G U   W R L G N I Q   S L V L E S P   H E U T X B O   N D H V X D C
  F C W V V G H   R P P L S C J   B W G A M Q G   G I O T L L I   H V T C M S U

  H V T C M S U   H Z K Q X B L   C O K A Q P A   Y M Y L W K U   Z W G L S R E
  O U D S J T F   J N U Q N Q L   A A I L M Z U   X I E W O B Y   I W E H P D Q
  H Z K Q X B L   C O K A Q P A   Y M Y L W K U   Z W G L S R E   J A Y W X M M


  New Cryptogram:   L C N D M E K A A A L M C J - B G X K B B X...........(Etc.)


As to why this encipherment reduces to alternate Vigenère and variant
Beaufort groups, this is best understood by resorting once more to
the “mathematical” aspects of the Vigenère cipher. In a previous
discussion, we have said that Vigenère encipherment consists in the
“addition” of key to message, and that variant Beaufort encipherment
(which, in Vigenère, would be _decipherment_), consists in the
“subtraction” of key from message. In the beginning, our plaintext
is a series of groups, as _A_, _B_, _C_, _D_, _E_, etc. and the first
encipherment operation consists in the _addition_ of a key, as _X_,
but only to the first group, _A_. To encipher group _B_, we add _A_;
to encipher group _C_, we add _B_, and so on, so that when the
auto-encipherment is complete, we have a cryptogram in which the
groups are made up as follows:

  _1st_:        _2d_:         _3d_:         _4th_:        _5th_:
  _A plus X_    _B plus A_    _C plus B_    _D plus C_    _E plus D_. . . . . . (etc.)


             Figure 124

  The New Cryptogram from Figure 123

     L C N D M E K A A A L M C J 
     B G X K B B X R M K M Z V M
     Z S L Z I T K Z Q Y X D L N
     B Z X H Z A O G E T X L U I
     Q C Y K M P X L B A F W A N
     F C W V V G H R P P L S C J 
     B W G A M Q G G I O T L L I
     H V T C M S U H Z K Q X B L
     C O K A Q P A Y M Y L W K U
     Z W G L S R E J A Y W X M M
     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
  (Vigenère)      (Variant Beaufort)


Now, remembering what the mathematical valves were for key-letters,
the trial key, made up entirely of _A_’s, is made up entirely of
_zeros_. When we subtract zero from the first group, we leave it
unchanged, that is, the first cryptogram group is still _A plus X_
(plaintext _plus key_, or Vigenère). When we subtract _A plus X_
from the second group, this cancels the _A_ of both, and leaves _B
minus X_ (plaintext _minus_ _key_, or variant). When we subtract this
from the third group, we cancel the two _B_’s, leaving _C plus X_,
again Vigenère. When we subtract this from the fourth group, we
cancel the two _C_’s, leaving _D minus X_, again variant Beaufort.
And so to the end. Always we come out with the original plaintext
group plus or minus _X_, the key. Those groups which are _plus X_
are Vigenère, and those which are _minus X_ are variant. And _X_,
in all, is the same: the original preliminary key. A comparison
of the same kind applied to the two Beauforts (or a few trials made
on actual groups, if the student is not mathematically disposed) will
show whether or not the auto-enciphered Beauforts can also be reduced
to periodic form, and, if so, what their period is likely to be. In
the case of the true Beaufort, it may be necessary to straighten out
a quirk as to the application of the _trial key_.


                                     Figure 125

                      Tables of High-Frequency Co-Efficients    PHILLIP D. HURST


     VIGENÈRE                        (Cipher Letters)
                    A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
                E           a       e     h i         n o     r s t
                T   h i         n o     r s t             a       e
            K   A   a       e     h i         n o     r s t
            e   O     n o     r s t             a       e     h i
            y   N   n o     r s t             a       e     h i
            s   I   s t             a       e     h i         n o     r
                S   i         n o     r s t             a       e     h
                H   t             a       e     h i         n o     r s
                R           n o     r s t             a       e     h i
                    6 4 1 - 4 4 4 4 4 2 3 4 3 2 3 2 1 4 4 2 2 6 4 2 2 4


  BEAUFORT                           (Cipher Letters)
    True Beaufort:  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
    ...VARIANT...   A Z Y X W V U T S R Q P O N M L K J I H G F E D C B
                E   e       a             t s r     o n         i h
                T   t s r     o n         i h     e       a
            K   A   a             t s r     o n         i h     e
            e   O   o n         i h     e       a             t s r
            y   N   n         i h     e       a             t s r     o
            s   I   i h     e       a             t s r     o n
                S   s r     o n         i h     e       a             t
                H   h     e       a             t s r     o n         i
                R   r     o n         i h     e       a             t s
                    9 4 1 2 4 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 2 1 4


      PORTA                          (Cipher letters)
                    A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
                E       r s t             n o     a       e     h i
                T           n o     r s t     e     h i         a
            K   A   n o     r s t             a       e     h i
            e   O               n o     r s t   h i         a       e
            y   N   t             n o     r s h i         a       e
            s   I   r s t             n o             a       e     h i
                S           n o     r s t     e     h i         a
                H     r s t             n o         a       e     h i
                R             n o     r s t       h i         a       e
                    3 3 3 2 4 4 3 2 3 4 6 5 3 4 2 3 4 4 - 2 3 3 3 3 3 2


  * * *

While the foregoing methods are intensely interesting as an example
of what can be learned by analyzing the structure of a cipher, most
members of the American Cryptogram Association, in practical work,
prefer methods of their own which are quicker in giving results.
These methods, for the most part, have subordinated other
considerations to certain original observations concerning the use
of the purely plaintext key. Where message and key, as in the case
of the autokey and “running key” encipherment, are each made up of
normal text, with both members including the normal 70% of
high-frequency letters, it becomes inevitable that high-frequency
letters in the key and high-frequency letters in the message will be
paired again and again as the co-efficients of cryptogram-letters,
so that cryptograms enciphered with this kind of key must contain a
great many letters caused by this kind of co-incidence. For
convenience in making use of this fact, each member has his own
ideas. Phillip D. Hurst, for instance, prepared a set of tables of
about the kind shown in Fig. 125, one table for each
multiple-alphabet cipher with which he expected to deal. As these
are shown, the alphabet across the top of any table is a list of
possible cryptogram-letters, each cryptogram-letter heading its own
column; and each column contains only those letters which are
themselves members of the high-frequency group _E T A O N I R S H_,
and which, if enciphered by another letter from the same group, would
result in the cryptogram-letter standing at the top of the column.
The key, in each case, can be found at the left. Hurst says that he
always attacks a cryptogram at the _second letter_, on the theory
that this particular letter is likely to have been a frequent one in
both the message and the key. He then attempts to follow out _series
2_, or, if the group-length has not previously been determined, to
find this series. To explain, without going into too much detail, the
second letter in our foregoing autokeyed Vigenère was _C_. A glance
at the table for Vigenère shows that this letter can result from only
one pair of high-frequency co-efficients, _O_ enciphered by _O_.
Hurst will make his first trial on _series 2_, beginning with initial
key-letter _O_, and come out with the correct decipherment at his
very first attempt! With other letters, as _V_ or _A_, it might be
necessary to make as many as six trials, but, as we have seen, it is
hardly ever necessary to carry a trial very far in order to see that
the decipherment is going to be a poor one. The second letter, of
course, will not necessarily give results; but the cryptogram,
remember, is filled with these vulnerable letters, and a decipherment
may be started with any letter whatever and carried out in both
directions.


                                    Figure 126

               Where the KEY is a Segment of Ordinary PLAINTEXT:

      Estimated Rank of the Cryptogram Letters and Their Frequencies Per 10,000

                Figured by C. Stanley Lamb From Table of Ohaver.

  VIGENÈRE

      V   A   I   S    ERL WHB XGM FOZ     K   N   T  P  U  J  Y  C  Q  D
     344 314 304 296   (Intermediate)     150 112 84 84 84 72 72 64 49 --

  BEAUFORT
    & VARIANT

   A   N   E   W   O   M   Z     BQK JRT HVF GUDX     P   L   S   I   Y   C
  480 262 246 246 196 196 191     (Intermediate)     121 121 104 104 57  57


  PORTA

       K   N   L   E    RMF TWP UYQ XGC AVI BJZ     D   H   O   S
      329 300 282 275       (Intermediate)         132 113 97  --


Another method, originated by C. Stanley Lamb, differs from Hurst’s
chiefly in that his observations were made from _digrams_ and not
from single letters. Originally, Lamb had been collaborating with
Admiral Snow in establishing frequency counts for various kinds of
ciphers, so that when the system was unknown, it would be possible
to tell one from another. Fig. 126, for instance, gives a rough
estimate as to what the rank and frequency should be for each letter
in the kind of cipher we have under consideration. Finding a
reasonably long cryptogram in which the letters _D_ and _Q_ have
ranked among the last, with letters _V_, _A_, _I_, and _S_ ranking
among the first, we have a fairly good reason for suspecting that the
encipherment was accomplished with a very long Vigenère plaintext key.


                                      Figure 127

  (a)  Preparation of the mixed alphabet............ C  U  L  P  E  •  •  R
                                                     A  B  D  F  G  H  I  J
                                                     K  M  N  O  Q  S  T  V
                                                     W  X  Y  Z


  C  A  K  W  U  B  M  X  L  D  N  Y  P  F  O  Z  E  G  Q  H  S  I  T  R  J  V
  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26


  (b)  ENCIPHERMENT - Auxiliary Key X, or 8:

     Plaintext:            S  E  N  D  S  U  P  P  L  I  E  S  T  O  M  O  R
     FIRST Substitution:  21 17 11 10 21  5 13 13  9 22 17 21 23 15  7 15 24
     AUTOKEY (Addition):   8 21 17 11 10 21  5 13 13  9 22 17 21 23 15  7 15
  C R Y P T O G R A M...  29-38-28-21-31-26-18-26-22-31-39-38-44-38-22-22-39-
                                                           ════════
                                                              ══════════════

                  L  E  Y  T  O  M  O  P  R  O  W  S  T  O  P
                  9 17 12 23 15  7 15 24 24 15  4 21 23 15 13
                 24  9 17 12 23 15  7 15 24 24 15  4 21 23 15
                 33-26-29-35-38-22-22-39-48-39-19-25-44-38-28.
                          ══════════════          ════════
                             xxxxxxxxxxx             xxxxx

  (c)  Detail of DECIPHERENT:

              Cryptogram Numbers:       29  38  28  21  31  26  18  26 ...
              AUTOKEY (Subtraction):     8  21  17  11  10  21   5  13 ...
              PRIMARY CRYPTOGRAM......  21  17  11  10  21   5  13  13 ...
              Re-Substitution.........   S   E   N   D   S   U   P   P ...

  (d)  Vigenère Autokey - What Happens to REPEATED SEQUENCES with a ONE-LETTER KEY:

                      Key...  X/ T  H  E  M  O  N  T  H  E  X  T
                      Text... T  H  E  M  O  N  T  H  E  X  T  E
                                 A  L              A  L


But for short cryptograms, Lamb did not find these characteristic
frequency counts half so convincing as the presence in a cryptogram
of certain _digrams_, which appeared to be characteristic for each
cipher, since he was always able to find from 7 to 10 of them in each
100 letters. By making use of the high-frequency digrams (_th_, _he_,
_er_, _in_, _an_, and so on), he then established lists of cipher
digrams which were very characteristic indeed for each type of
encipherment. Thus, in attacking an autokey, it is possible to make
a good beginning with such a digram as _VV_ (_er_-_re_) or _XK_
(_th_-_ed_), if the cipher is Vigenère, and work in both directions.

“_Key-Length 1_.” — Many writers are inclined to make a special case
of the autokey in which the “priming” is done with a single letter,
not that this actually constitutes a different cipher, but because
of the decryptment curiosities which can be brought to light in
connection with it. For instance: Having a cryptogram fragment
. . . . . . ._W S Y Q L A H T G B_. . . . . known to be Vigenère
autokey, initiated with a single letter, can you find instantly the
trigrams _SAY_ and _HAT_? Would you have any reason for trying the
word _WAS_? Of the many interesting observations which have come the
writer’s way with reference to the one-letter initial key, only one
has seemed to present the germ of an additional decryptment method.
This observation was one made by Ohaver in connection with a cipher
in which the substitutes were numbers. The cipher itself can be
examined in Fig. 127.

The first step, (a), consists in the preparation of a simple
substitution key in which the plaintext alphabet is in mixed order
and the cipher alphabet is made up of the numbers 1 to 26. The
encipherment, shown at (b), involves two steps. First, there must be
a simple substitution, using the key of (a), and this results in a
_primary cryptogram_. Afterward, this primary cryptogram, preceded
by an initial key-number, is _added to itself_. In the discussion to
follow, our objective will be that of _recovering the primary
cryptogram_ (and not the plaintext, which would have to be found
later by simple substitution methods). Decipherment, indicated at
(c), consists in reversing the two steps of the encipherment: A
series of subtractions restores the primary cryptogram, and is
followed by the resubstitution of letters. At (d) we have a Vigenère
fragment for comparison. The essential fact to be noticed in (d) is
the behavior of repeated sequences when the group-length is 1. Any
repeated sequence in the plaintext continues to show a repetition in
the cryptogram which is shorter by one letter than the original. Even
the repeated digrams will give repeated single letters.


                                     Figure 128

                          A TRIAL-Decipherment (M. E. OHAVER)

  The Cryptogram:    29 38 28 21 31 26 18 26 22 31 39 38 44 38 22 22 39
                      9 20 18 10 11 20  6 12 14  8 23 16 22 22 16  6 16
                     20 18 10 11 20  6 12 14  8 23 16 22 22 16  6 16 23
                                                      ════════

              33 26 29 35 38 22 22 39 48 39 19 25 44 38 28
              23 10 16 13 22 16  6 16 23 25 14  5 20 24 14
              1O 16 13 22 16  6 16 23 25 14  5 20 24 14 14
                                               ════════


Now, putting aside the fact of the mixed plaintext alphabet (since we
do not intend to recover the letters) we have here a cipher which, to
all intents and purposes, is the Vigenère autokey initiated with a
single letter. In place of the letters _A_ to _Z_ we have numbers 1
to 26, and the encipherment is a series of additions. In the
corresponding Vigenère case, the group-length 1 will usually show up
plainly in the number of doubled letters — “letters repeated at
interval 1.” And with the group-length determined as 1, it is
possible to begin with some given initial key, as _A_, and either
reproduce the plaintext or convert the autokeyed cryptogram to a
periodic one in which the period is 2 (twice the group-length).
Considering the analogy between the two cases, it should be possible
to do the same thing here. That is, it should be possible to take the
autokeyed cryptogram of (b), initiate its decipherment with some
number chosen between 1 and 26, and either reproduce the primary
cryptogram or convert the autokeyed cryptogram to a periodic one in
which the alternate numbers will belong to two cipher alphabets.
Where this reduction has been carried out in Fig. 128, the initial
decipherment was made with key 9 in order to avoid a discussion of
negative numbers. Also, the fact of numbers will usually limit the
range of the trial keys: here, the first number, 29, was not
enciphered by adding any number smaller than 3.

Now, looking at Fig. 129, let us compare the new cryptogram of Fig.
128 with the primary cryptogram of Fig. 127(b), and see whether or
not it has the expected formation. Between the two cryptograms (the
supposedly periodic one obtained from the trial decipherment and the
one we hope to recover), there is a constant numerical difference in
the pairs of corresponding substitutes, and this difference,
throughout, is alternately plus and minus. Further comparisons can
be made, if the student so desires, by initiating other partial
decipherments with trial-keys 10, 11, 12, etc. Always, the constant
numerical difference persists, and always it is alternately plus and
minus. Moreover, for every time that the initial key-number increases
in size, there is a corresponding decrease in all numbers occupying
the odd serial positions and a corresponding increase in all numbers
occupying the even positions.


                                     Figure 129

               Comparison of TRIAL DECIPHERMENT with TRUE DECIPHERMENT

  True decipherment - (See Figure 127):     21  17  11  10  21   5  13  13   9  22...
  Trial decipherment of Figure 128:         20  18  10  11  20   6  12  14   8  23...
               CONSTANT DIFFERENCE:          1  -1   1  -1   1  -1   1  -1   1  -1


We have, then, a periodic cryptogram whose period is 2, and two
cipher alphabets, consisting of numbers, in which the only difference
is one of size. But these substitutes, unlike those of the Vigenère,
will not be placed in normal alphabetical order; to complete the
solution by one of the general methods, it may become necessary to
take a number of frequency counts. For instance, considering the
first of the two Bassières processes, it would be possible to set up
the same tableau (Fig. 122), causing numbers to run alternately
backward and forward (and beginning again at 1 whenever the number 26
is reached). In this way, one of the columns would contain the
primary cryptogram, and a frequency count taken on the numbers of
that column should resemble a simple substitution frequency count.

Considering the second of the Bassières processes, the autokeyed
cryptogram is already reduced to a period of 2; the subsequent
solution of the periodic cryptogram belongs to the general case of
the next chapter; that is, a case in which the cipher alphabets are
in mixed order but parallel. But we have, here, a special method, and
a short-cut. The only difference between our two cipher alphabets is
a matter of size in all corresponding substitutes. If we can find out
what this numerical difference is, we have only to increase or
decrease the size of the numbers in one of the cipher alphabets and
bring it to the level of the other. Our short-cut, as pointed out by
Ohaver, lies in repeated sequences (or even repeated single letters)
in the autokeyed cryptogram. A glance back at the plaintext of the
foregoing example will show that two repetitions were pointed out:
_STO_ and _TOMOR_, and that these were still present in the primary
cryptogram as 21-23-15 and 23-15-7-15-24. In the autokeyed version,
they were still repeated sequences, but shorter in length: 44-38 and
38-22-22-39.

Had we initiated our trial decipherment with the correct number, 8,
these two repetitions would, of course, have worked back to their
original length. But where this trial decipherment was made with a
different initial key-number (Fig. 128) we find that only one of the
sequences, _TOMOR_, has done this; the other, _STO_, has disappeared.
The explanation for this has been summed up in Fig. 130. One sequence
was repeated at interval 8, which is _even_. When the autokeyed
cryptogram is converted to one having period 2, any interval which is
divisible by 2 will contain a certain number of periods; thus, any
repeated sequence at interval 8, will appear in the periodic
cryptogram as one of the ordinary periodic repetitions. The other
sequence, _STO_, was repeated at interval 17, which is _odd_, and
thus cannot show up as a repetition in any cryptogram whose period
is 2.

It is this repeated sequence found at the odd interval which is to
give us our short-cut. We have only two cipher alphabets, each one
having a substitute for _S_, a substitute for _T_, and a substitute
for _O_. When the repetition occurs at the odd interval, we obtain
_both_ substitutes for _S_, _both_ substitutes for _T_, and _both_
substitutes for _O_. By subtracting one sequence from the other, we
may learn the numerical difference between the two cipher alphabets.
Notice that the difference is _constant_, is _alternately plus and
minus_, and is _divisible by 2_. (One alphabet is larger than the
original, and the other is smaller by the same amount.) Our special
method, then, for a cryptogram known to have been enciphered in this
way, is as follows: First, underscore all repeated sequences which
occur at odd intervals, or, in their absence, the repeated single
letters. Those which are long will almost surely represent
repetitions in the plaintext. Then, selecting a suitable number,
make a trial decipherment and examine the resulting sequences. If,
by any chance, those repetitions found at the odd intervals have
worked back to longer repeated sequences, then the trial key and the
original initial key must have been the same. If not, try subtracting
one result from the other. If both have represented the same
plaintext sequence, the result of the subtraction will be a constant
difference, alternately plus and minus, and divisible by 2. To
restore the primary cryptogram, split this uniform difference, adding
half of it to the numbers of one alphabet, and subtracting half of it
from the numbers of the other alphabet. This, as mentioned in the
beginning, will leave a simple substitution cryptogram still to be
investigated.


                           Figure 130

  Respective Behavior of the Cryptogram's Two Repeated Sequences

  Sequence  38-22-22-39                   Sequence  44-38
  Repeated at interval 8                  Repeated at interval 17

                        Trial Decipherments:

  1st occurrence:  22-16- 6-16-23      1st occurrence:   22-22-16
  2d  occurrence:  22-16- 6-16-23      2d  occurrence:   20-24-14
                                                          2 -2  2

  (This interval was EVEN)                (This interval was ODD)


Our explanation, perhaps, has been a little rapid, but the student
who has read carefully will be able to discover the “germ” originally
referred to, and to make his own laboratory tests. Also, there may be
an interesting answer to the following question: When the cipher is
one of the Beauforts (using letters), and the auto-encipherment is
initiated with a single letter, does a trial decipherment, initiated
with some other single letter, result in a period of 2?


128.  By ELIA, JR.   (Variant, Autokeyed).

O O U J V   J M K N C   B U Q L P   F U L A S   A Z F T G   M P B V A   Y V S Q J
L F A W S   P C H A E   I U N R S   M F V W S   S O O H M   E B E A M   K F A A X
R H K Z R   J Q A O I   A V M E I   B T O P D   J G P R J   N F R X T   I I G X F
K D H X A   F T H J Q   H L A R K   T G D L P   S B M V Y   E E V A O   A C S M U
V U W C V   C T S K S   M W L O N   P A O O H   M W W P Y   P O H I L   G A Z Q B
Q U Z B Q   P K M B O   V K W J H   P J A G D   C H X G W   Q B K O G   Y A K S I
W N W E X   Q N U S U   C V O E Y   H Y J J C   B T B V J   Q M N S P   A R V P X
O A G T A   V L V C Z   B D I X N   F M W U E   Z L N N N   W B M O X   G T C P K.

129.  By ELIA, JR.   (Beaufort, Autokeyed).

O A N C Q   R O Q N Y   Z G K P L   V G P A I   A B V H U   O L Z F A   C F M A V
Z J H T I   L L X V B   C Z M M T   O W Z W A   O Q V P M   M Q D L Q   K O H K F
G O B T L   R A U X Y   T Y S F N   O C Y G R   P M U U H   T H E W P   O O S R G
R Z Z S L   Y G K I A   N K M M T   O W Z W A   O Q V A B   E U X W T   C T J I O
G L P H T   E F U F B   R X M U Z   V L D B P   K N S Y A   Q B I V M   O H P V L
G Z Y F C   C W C O M   C A W N A   A A E V A   W M P E B   Q X O D O   V P X A T
E M A J A   T P M J E   A Z Z M D   S B B N A   A A F G L   I D N X A   M K H K P
D B B P Q   Y.

130.  By ELIA, JR.   (St. Cyr, Autokeyed).

T B F N Q   X E F D G   F W E A F   X S Q U N   I G A H E   U N B B J   L O B Q P
H F A K A   S N X G B   P E E J W   W L Z J O   M L L A P   R V Y T N   M X H Y V
O S E S Q   V O A Q M   O G V P A   J K P Y I   U Z F Q G   Y J Y T L   D F E L Q
Z L W Y Y   U Y Z N E   P P F W B   R W M E E   F R W X J   W E P R V   Y B U M P
Z Z M T S   B U K K B   A L K Z I   L Q A L Z   K K F S X   Z U S T G   J T H A R
G S B X I   W V L Z B   Z M P I K   Y I U R H   R V W C V   A U F V L   W F Q Z U
D I G F W   H T Z M S   F B K T Z   U T R K I   V F Z X W   L C A U J   P A N V S
E O Z U X   G I X D S   X M G Q E   L Q T V B   L E I D I   A L L A I   N O E N L
V J I O I   S W Q T D   E C T M.




CHAPTER XVII
Some Periodic Number-Ciphers

The use of numbers in a periodic cipher does not, in itself, create a
problem essentially different from that of the letter-ciphers.
Numbers may, in themselves, cause weakness; we saw such a case in the
last of our autokey examples, where a complete disarrangement in
their order did nothing to conceal their size. But oftener than not,
the weakness lies in the construction of the cipher or in the manner
of its application, and while this is fully as true of letter ciphers,
the numbers, for some reason, appear to be more inviting for certain
kinds of misuse.

In order to observe a weakness which need not have existed, let us
consider the slide partially shown in Fig. 131. The use of two-digit
numbers will furnish a hundred substitutes; but a strip of that
length is awkward to handle, and the constructor of the present slide
has confined its length to forty numbers. Then, since he has only
fifteen different cipher alphabets, and wishes to make use of
word-keys, he has adjusted his 26 key-letters to fit the number of
alphabets. Now if the alphabet of the slide (that is, the _cipher
alphabet_, or series of numbers) is written in straight 1-2-3 order,
and if it is considered that letters may have two or more values, so
that _A_ has the values 1, 27, 53, etc., _B_ the values 2, 28, etc.,
_C_ the values 3, 29, and so on, a slide of this kind is exactly the
equivalent of the Saint-Cyr slide, since any cryptogram accomplished
with it could be promptly converted to a Vigenère cryptogram by
substituting letters for numbers. The keys, of course, might differ.
The constructor of the slide has desired something more difficult.
But instead of carrying his forty numbers through a transposition
block, and really mixing them, he has been content to group them, in
regular order, by their tens. We shall see in a moment what happens
to his cryptograms. But he neglects also an opportunity: Presuming
that his circumstances are such as to make the use of numbers
practical at all, why waste the opportunity to use the full one
hundred substitutes? The remaining sixty numbers might have been
placed on the next two rows, and thus, in every position of the
slide, he could have had two or three optional substitutes for every
letter — a much more difficult case than the simple periodic.


                                      Figure 131

                     A Slide Carrying a NUMBER-Alphabet (and Keys)

                                       (    Plaintext Alphabet - Stationary
                                       (
                                       ( A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M .....
                (           10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 00 11 21 31 41 51 61 71 .....
  Sliding Cipher-Alphabet:                                                          
  Key-letters may be added:  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O)
                (            *  P  Q  R  •  S  T  U  *  V  W  X  Y  Z  *)           

  The addition of key-letters makes it possible to employ a keyword.  For the present
  forty-number slide, it was necessary to double them up as in Porta.  A slide having
  fifty-one numbers would have accommodated all twenty-six of the key-letters.


The cryptogram of Fig. 132 was enciphered with the slide of the
preceding figure, using the key-word CABLO (equivalent to the
numerical key 30-10-20-21-51), and its period, 5, can be determined
in the usual way. However, we have already seen the Kasiski method;
suppose, here, we look at another, originated by Ohaver; and, since
Ohaver himself, explaining his method in connection with a
number-cipher of much the kind we have here, illustrated with single
numbers instead of with sequences, it seems fitting that it be
illustrated again in the same way.


                                   Figure 132

              Cryptogram Enciphered with the Slide of Figure 131

  32 41 31 61 33 12 32 60 91 91 30 81 70 92 92 51 52 61 23 43 71 01 90 61 71 
  71 41 12 92 51 01 52 12 91 91 80 50 30 92 53 30 81 62 72 62 30 41 00 02 43 
  71 20 60 41 51 01 81 00 61 81 71 12 12 31 93 61 50 00 32 33 70 41 00 52 33 
  22 50 20 51 92 80 31 61 92 23 11 91 01 13 92 81 51 12 91 91 01 30 90 21 82 
  90 50 01 21 23 70 20 60 01 82 90 31 20 51 91 22 51 12 91 32 12 50 51 51 33 
  71 10 01 13 92 40 50 91 61 51 60 52 42 91 91 61 01 90 61 43 11 31 60 41 92 
  51 50 01 02 92 81 21 60 21 33 70 21 60 13 72 70 80 60 21 23 01 90 80 91 43 
  30 32 20 63 32 80 01 90 61 23 70 90 01 21 82 72 51 30 12 91 50 01 00 62 82 
  40 50 40 21 53 12 50 12 91 32 12 90 01 81 92 11 41 80 13 92 22 10 21 61 43 
  11 31 60 21 82 60 32 60 51 92 61 01 42 21 82 22 10 51 63 22 11 01 40 91 51 
  22 01 90 61 62 30 91 12 42 32 61 12 12 61 33.


As pointed out more than once, those characters having the highest
frequencies in periodic cryptograms will nearly always have derived
these high frequencies because of their occurrence in more than one
of the cipher alphabets; while those having the lower frequencies
will more often represent repetitions in some one cipher alphabet.
Thus, when we find, in the present cryptogram, that the numbers 02,
53, and 63, have each a frequency of 2, it seems reasonable to
suppose, for each number, that its two occurrences were in a single
cipher alphabet; that is, that each one is a periodic repetition.
Now, considering Fig. 133, and confining our observations, for the
moment, to the number 02, we find that this number, in the cryptogram,
occupies serial positions 49 and 154. Having first laid out a series
of columns headed by the various possible periods, 2, 3, 4, 5.
. . . . , we use each possible period in turn as a divisor, first
applying them all to the serial number 49, and then applying them
all to the serial number 154, each time setting down, in the proper
column, _the remainder from the division_. This remainder tells us,
each time, into what cipher alphabet the number 02 would fall, should
the cryptogram be rewritten into the period indicated at the top of a
given column. Still confining our observations to the number 02: It
is seen, under possible period 2, that if this were the period, then
the two occurrences of the number 02 would be in different alphabets.
The same can be seen under possible periods 4, 6, 8, 9, 10. But if
the period were 3, both occurrences of our number would fall into
alphabet 1; if it were 5, both occurrences would fall into alphabet
4; if it were 7, both occurrences would fall into alphabet 7
(remainder zero indicates the final alphabet of the given period).
Here, then, it would appear that possible periods 3, 5, and 7, are
more likely than the rest, as far as the tabulation goes. When
exactly the same observations are made for the number 53, it appears
that the most likely periods are 3 and 5. And when these observations
are made again for the number 63, only the period 5 is indicated as a
likely one. Since the period 5 has been indicated oftener than any
other, this is probably the correct period, as we happen to know
that it is.

When the same method is applied to repeated sequences, the serial
numbers can be those of the repeated first number. And it may, of
course, be applied to letters, just as the Kasiski method might have
been applied here. As to why Ohaver might have preferred this method
in dealing with numbers, let us examine, in the figure, the entire
column under possible period 5. The Ohaver method, unlike the
Kasiski, not only indicates the period, but, in addition, shows the
exact alphabet of that period into which a repeated number will fall.
The number 02 is shown as belonging to alphabet 4 ; the number 53 as
belonging to alphabet 5; and the number 63 as belonging to alphabet
4. It is thus possible to see that the very small number 02 and the
very large number 63 belong to a same cipher alphabet; and since a
range of over sixty numbers cannot correspond to only twenty-six
letters, we may conclude at once that the numbers on the slide were
not in consecutive order. Often, our information is exactly the
opposite.


                            Figure 133

               An OHAVER Method for Finding Period

                                 P O S S I B L E   P E R I O D S
  Substitute   Serial Position     2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 ...

      02             49            1  1  1  4  1  0  1  4  9 ...
                    154            0  1  2  4  4  0  2  1  4 ...

      53             40            0  1  0  0  4  5  0  4  0 ...
                    205            1  1  1  0  1  2  5  7  5 ...

      63            179            1  2  3  4  5  4  3  8  9 ...
                    244            0  1  0  4  4  6  4  1  4 ...
                                            X
                                            X


  * * *

Returning, now, to our cryptogram: In the beginning, we probably made
a general frequency count; if not, we now have the five individual
counts to be taken. And, as previously mentioned, a frequency count
made on numbers is much more conveniently accomplished on a 10 x 10
chart than by sorting and listing the numbers. The moment our five
frequency counts are made, in the present case, two facts become
evident: Each count includes only fifteen or twenty _different_
numbers, with about the frequency-distribution of simple substitution;
and, while the tens-digits have included a full series, the units
have never run beyond 3. The cipher, then, is a simple periodic; had
multiple substitutes been used, the frequency counts would have
included more different numbers, and with frequencies more uniformly
distributed. As to the series of numbers, two probabilities are
suggested, and these, in effect, are the same thing: The numbers may
have run in straight order into the thirties, and with each number
reversed; or: the numbers may have been grouped by tens. It is
further possible that the whole series runs backward, or that the
tens do, or the units, or sections of a certain length; and some
uncertainty may arise as to the rank, in the series, of the digit
zero; this digit is ordinarily last, but occasionally is ranked
first. It is, of course, possible that the series of numbers is well
mixed, but the chances are that it is merely methodized; the person
who uses numbers in a simple periodic cipher is not usually one who
knows the dangers of regularity in a cipher alphabet.


                                 Figure 134

  A Series of PARALLEL Frequency Counts Which Can Be LINED UP By PATTERN


   10       .            111          .            .            .
   20       .            11           111          .            .
   30       11111        1            11           .            .
   40       11           .            11           .            .
   50       1            11111 1111   .            .            .
   60       11           .            11111 1111   .            .
   70       11111        .            1            .            .
   80       111          1            11           .            .
   90       11           111          11111        .            .
   00       .            .            11111        .            .
   11       11111        .            .            .            .
   21       .            11           1            11111 111    .
   31       .            1111         1            1            .
   41       .            11111        .            11           .
   51       11           111          11           1111         1111
   61       1111         .            11           11111 1111   .
   71       11111        .            .            .            1
   81       11           111          .            1            1
   91       .            11           1            11111 111    11111 1
   01       1111         11111 11     11111 1      1            .
   12       1111         11           11111 111    1            .
   22       11111        .            .            .            1
   32       1            111          .            1            1111
   42       .            .            11           1            .
   52       .            111          .            1            .
   62       .            .            1            1            11
   72       1            .            .            1            1
   82       .            .            .            .            11111 1
   92       .            .            .            1111         11111 1111
   02       .            .            .            11           .
   13       .            .            .            1111         .
   23       .            .            .            1            1111
   33       .            .            .            .            11111 1
   43       .            .            .            .            11111
   53       .            .            .            .            11
   63       .            .            .            11           .
   73       .            .            .            .            .
   83       .            .            .            .            .
   93       .            .            .            .            1
   03       .            .            .            .            .


We may try, then, to restore his original arrangement (or an
equivalent one), placing beside it the five frequency counts in their
five columns, as shown in Fig. 134. The probable arrangements are
very few, and the placing of tally-marks opposite their numbers is
very rapid, since this, at each trial, is a mere matter of
copying them from their charts. Once the correct rearrangement is
reached, notice, in the figure, the appearance of the five frequency
counts. Insofar as is ever likely to happen with columnar counts,
_all five have followed the same graph_. This, of course, is the
simplest case; the finding of the encipherer’s original order, so
that every frequency count has followed the graph of the normal
alphabet. Any substitute can be identified, as in Vigenère, by its
serial position in its own alphabet; and where numbers are used,
there is seldom any doubt as to what number comes first in its
alphabet. The shortest road to solution would be as follows: Prepare
a temporary slide _exactly like the one which was used_ (except that
we have no way of knowing what the key-letters were), mark the points
at which the five alphabets begin, and decipher with the slide.

There are many other cases, hardly more difficult, in which our
rearrangement of numbers results, not in the original order, but in
an _equivalent order_. We could, for instance, arrive at a
rearrangement in which we have taken each third number, or each fifth
number, of the original cipher alphabet, so that our rearranged
numbers are following plaintext letters in the order
_A D G J_. . . . or _A F K P_. . . . ; thus, all of our frequency
counts would be following one same graph, though not the graph of the
normal alphabet. The problem here is to make sure that their graphs
are all the same graph, and then subject them to the process called
“lining up.”


                                      Figure 135

                The LINING UP of the Frequency Counts of Figure 134

  ┌1st┐         ┌2d ┐         ┌3d ┐         ┌4th┐         ┌5th┐              TOTALS
  │   │         │   │         │   │         │   │         │   │
  │ 30│11111    │ 10│111      │ 20│111      │ 21│11111111 │ 51│1111            23 *
  │ 40│11       │ 20│11       │ 30│11       │ 31│1        │ 61│                 7
  │ 50│1        │ 30│1        │ 40│11       │ 41│11       │ 71│1                7
  │ 60│11       │ 40│         │ 50│         │ 51│1111     │ 81│1                7
  │ 70│11111    │ 50│111111111│ 60│111111111│ 61│111111111│ 91│111111          38 *
  │ 80│111      │ 60│         │ 70│1        │ 71│         │ 01│                 4
  │ 90│11       │ 70│         │ 80│11       │ 81│1        │ 12│                 5
  │ 00│         │ 80│1        │ 90│11111    │ 91│11111111 │ 22│1               15 *
  │ 11│11111    │ 90│111      │ 00│11111    │ 01│1        │ 32│1111            18 *
  │ 21│         │ 00│         │ 11│         │ 12│1        │ 42│             **  1
  │ 31│         │ 11│         │ 21│1        │ 22│         │ 52│             **  1
  │ 41│         │ 21│11       │ 31│1        │ 32│1        │ 62│11               6
  │ 51│11       │ 31│1111     │ 41│         │ 42│1        │ 72│1                8
  │ 61│1111     │ 41│11111    │ 51│11       │ 52│1        │ 82│111111          18 *
  │ 71│11111    │ 51│111      │ 61│11       │ 62│1        │ 92│111111111       20 *
  │ 81│11       │ 61│         │ 71│         │ 72│1        │ 02│                 3
  │ 91│         │ 71│         │ 81│         │ 82│         │ 13│             **  0
  │ 01│1111     │ 81│111      │ 91│1        │ 92│1111     │ 23│1111            16 *
  │ 12│1111     │ 91│11       │ 01│111111   │ 02│11       │ 33│111111          20 *
  │ 22│11111    │ 01│1111111  │ 12│11111111 │ 13│1111     │ 43│11111           29 *
  │ 32│1        │ 12│11       │ 22│         │ 23│1        │ 53│11               6
  │ 42│         │ 22│         │ 32│         │ 33│         │ 63│             (V) 0
  │ 52│         │ 32│111      │ 42│11       │ 43│         │ 73│                 5
  │ 62│         │ 42│         │ 52│         │ 53│         │ 83│             **  0
  │ 72│1        │ 52│111      │ 62│1        │ 63│11       │ 93│1                8
  │ 82│         │ 62│         │ 72│         │ 73│         │ 03│             **  0
                                                                              265


To show the handling of all such cases (which would include our final
autokey example), let us assume that the five frequency counts of our
figure, though still following a common graph, are not following that
of the normal alphabet. In this case, granting that all fifty-letter
frequency counts will vary considerably from the normal, it is not
quite so obvious that their pattern is the same; we shall have to cut
them apart (preferably having copied numbers beside their frequencies)
and place them side by side for a comparison of their graphs. Where
this has been done, in Fig. 135, their similarity is plain in spite
of some discrepancies, and the moving up or down of any one or more
of the counts (which could be done so as to include another position,
since the range of the numbers is only 25 per alphabet) does not
result in greater similarity. If the alignment of this figure is
correct, then all numbers found on any one row are substituting for
one same original; thus, the added frequencies on any one row will be
the total frequency of some one letter in a 265-letter text, and all
of these totals, collectively, should resemble a frequency count
taken on a simple substitution cryptogram of that length. To just
what extent this is true may be seen at the right side of the figure.
The nine leading letters have totalled 74%, where we normally expect
70%; but any single example can provide its surprises, and the excess
4% is not on the wrong side of the ledger. The other end of the count,
as would be expected of the group _J K Q X Z_, is comparatively blank.


                                 Figure 136

                     The NIHILIST Number-Substitution

                        The "Checkerboard" Alphabet:

                            1 2 3 4 5

                        1   A B C D E        13 = C
                        2   F G H I K        34 = O
                        3   L M N O P        32 = M
                        4   Q R S T U        15 = E
                        5   V W X Y Z        44 = T

  Encipherment, with Keyword COMET:

            S   E   N   D   S   U   P   P   L   I   E   S   T   O   ....
  Text...  43  15  33  14  43  45  35  35  31  24  15  43  44  34   ....
  Key....  13  34  32  15  44  13  34  32  15  44  13  34  32  15   ....
           56  49  65  29  87  58  69  67  46  68  28  77  76  49   ....

  This cryptogram is usually seen without grouping:  56-49-65-29-87-58.....


Our substitutes, remember, are assumed to be in mixed order. We do
not know what letter is represented by the five numbers of the top
row, or by the five numbers of any other row. To proceed with
solution, we shall have to assign arbitrary values, calling the top
row _A_ (or 01), the second row _B_ (or 02), the third row _C_ (or
03), and so on; and when all of these substitutions have been made
on the cryptogram, _the case has been reduced to one of simple
substitution_. The mechanics by which the substitutions are made can
be exactly those of the other case: Prepare a temporary slide, on
which the numbers run in the order decided upon, and slide this
against the normal alphabet (or any other); the result is a simple
substitution cryptogram which can be solved by simple substitution
methods. This case, first in one form and then in another, is
encountered again and again; and however it may seem that its cause,
in some one example, is a different one, yet the fault in all such
examples is the same: The basic cipher alphabet (the primary one
from which others are derived), either by its actual construction
or by the method of its application, was not truly a mixed alphabet.

  * * *

In some of the periodic ciphers, the basic cipher alphabet is a
“checkerboard” of the kind we saw in Chapter XI, the substitutes
being two-digit numbers which will point out the columns and rows of
their originals. This primary alphabet, however, seldom appears
unchanged in the cryptograms, as “position 1” often does when a slide
is used, or as the _A_-alphabet often does in the Vigenère cipher.
Instead, we find a series of secondary cipher alphabets all of which
have been derived from the primary one according to a mathematical
process.

In view of the fact that any cipher which will necessarily double the
lengths of messages is of doubtful value, it seems inadvisable here
to do more than mention the infinite multiplicity of processes which
would be possible; but with checkerboards, it is difficult to imagine
any usable process which would not result in parallel frequency
counts; that is, counts which all follow the same graph and thus are
capable of being “lined up.” With most of these, in fact, the
difference between any two of the (secondary) cipher alphabets will
be a difference in _size_ which is uniform from _A_ to _Z_. (Often,
the same result is produced with slides.) Here, then, we may content
ourselves with a glance at one such cipher which is interesting
rather than important. In Fig. 136, we have another of the Nihilist
ciphers. Its primary alphabet is that most famous of checkerboards,
the _Polybius square_, said to have been the invention of the ancient
Greek historian, and certainly well known in his era as the basis for
a signalling system — a capacity, incidentally, in which it still
serves. We are showing it here in what seems to be the favorite
version: The alphabet of the square is the normal one, normally
arranged, with _J_ the missing letter; and the order of reading for
the two digits is row-column. It should be understood, however, that
these details, in practice, are quite variable.

For the Nihilist encipherment, the message is first subjected to a
simple substitution, using the checkerboard key. A key-word, treated
in the same way, is repeated often enough to pair one key-number with
each message-number, and the final cryptogram is formed by adding
these pairs of numbers. Decipherment, of course, will be the
subtraction of key-numbers from the finished cryptogram and the
resubstitution of letters. We have, then, another periodic cipher,
not essentially different from those already seen. Any number in the
checkerboard can become a key, to be applied periodically at some
given interval, and thus may govern one of the 25 possible cipher
alphabets. It would be possible to lay out any one of these cipher
alphabets, simply by adding a given amount to each number of the
primary one; if all of them were written one below another, and if
the primary alphabet were written across the top and along one side,
we should have a tableau which could be used in identically the
manner described for the use of the Vigenère tableau.

Decryptment, too, can parallel that of the Vigenère: The period of a
cryptogram can be found through repeated sequences, or, in their
absence, through repeated single numbers, and individual frequency
counts can be taken on the several alphabets of the period. If the
arrangement of letters in the checkerboard is that of the figure, or
any other strictly alphabetical one to which the order of the numbers
can be adjusted, these frequency counts will all follow the graph of
the normal alphabet, with allowance made for the missing letter. Or,
if the arrangement of letters in the checkerboard is not strictly
alphabetical, then the several frequency counts, no matter how badly
mixed, will still be parallel; they will all follow one graph, and
thus can be “lined up.” Very often, however, given the opportunity
to examine and analyze a cipher, it becomes possible to formulate for
it a special method which is much more rapid than the general one;
Ohaver, who first published a special method for the Nihilist, has
compared this cipher to a leaky boat in the open ocean.

Notice that its primary alphabet contains only the digits 1-2-3-4-5.
The maximum difference among these is 4; and the addition of any same
number to all of them does not change this fact; the maximum
difference between any two of the sums would still be 4. But the
number which is added during encipherment is also a number containing
no digit other than 1-2-3-4-5; thus any number found in a cryptogram
can be considered as carrying two separate additions, one for tens
and one for units. Even when two 5’s are added together, the result
is an all-revealing zero; the “carried” digit 1 can be mentally
“borrowed” back, causing the zero to become 10, and decreasing by 1
the size of the digit which precedes the zero. Specifically: Finding
in a cryptogram the number 40, we may regard this as having only
3 tens, with 10 units; or finding the number 110, we may regard it
as having 10 tens and 10 units. Thus, there is never a time when it
is impossible to see the tens and units as having been separately
added; if we find, in a Nihilist cryptogram, the two numbers 29 and
87, with a difference greater than 4 in their respective tens-digits,
we may say promptly that they were not enciphered with the same key;
no digit whatever added to any two digits of the original square can
produce a difference greater than 4. But if the two cryptogram
numbers are 30 and 77, where the difference in the tens-digits
appears, at first glance, to be only 4, the presence of the zero
must be taken into account; thus, the number 30 has only 2 tens,
and the difference between 2 and 7 is greater than 4; therefore,
the numbers 30 and 77 could not have been enciphered with the same
key. It is interesting, also, to note that the digit 2, found in a
cryptogram, can have been produced in only one way: the addition of
1 and 1; and that the digit 0, found in a cryptogram, can only have
been produced by the addition of 5 and 5. Either one of these digits
gives away its key; but, further than this, the cipher provides four
“give-away” numbers, 22, 30, 102, and 110, the presence of any one
of which in a cryptogram will give away the key to a whole cipher
alphabet.


                                      Figure 137

          Cryptogram by EDWIN LINDQUIST:                Final Investigation of
                                                          Supposed Period 4
  24-66-35-77-37-77-55-59-55-45-55-88-28-66-46-
                                                          24   66   35   77
  88-37-67-33-59-58-65-45-66-67-58-44-55-34-79-           37   77   55   59
                                                          55   45   55   88
  44-59-55-45-42-87-28-76-43-78-46-86-26-67-24-           28   66   46   88
                                                          37   67   33   59
  85-26-67-28-76-26-78-46-65-65-88-36-49-54-67-           58   65   45   66
                                                          67   58   44   55
  28-65-42-88-36-49-44-89-57-58-54-66-47-67-26.           34   79   44   59
                                                          55   45   42   87
                                                          28   76   43   78
                                                          46   86   26   67
                                                          24   85   26   67
                                                          28   76   26   78
                                                          46   65   65   88
                                                          36   49   54   67
                                                          28   65   42   88
                                                          36   49   44   89
                                                          57   58   54   66
                                                          47   67   26

                                                       (Acceptable throughout)


Now, to look at Ohaver’s special method, let us consider the
cryptogram of Fig. 137, prepared by another “inventor” of exactly
the same method. It can be noted, first, that this cryptogram has
not resulted from the addition of a single number throughout, since
it contains pairs of numbers like 24-88, 42-87, and so on, which
have a greater difference than 4 in either their tens or their units.
Now, using a bit of scratch-paper, we may, if we like, scribble down
a series of possible periods, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and so on, to be crossed
off as fast as we eliminate them. Considering these, one by one:

_Period 2_: With a thumbnail on the first number, 24, and another on
the third number, 35, we may run quickly through the cryptogram
comparing numbers found at interval 2; that is, the first and third
numbers, the second and fourth, the third and fifth, and so on, until
stopped by the two numbers 33 and 38, whose difference, in the units,
is greater than 4, showing that their key was not the same. Period 2,
then, is eliminated.

_Period 3_: Here we are stopped short at the very first comparison.
The numbers 24 and 77, found at the first interval 3, have a
difference greater than 4 in their tens, and thus cannot have been
enciphered with the same key. Period 3 is also eliminated.

_Period 4_: Starting again, and comparing numbers taken at interval
4, we are able to go all the way to the end of the cryptogram without
finding any two numbers whose difference, either in tens or in units,
is greater than 4. The numbers compared, however, included only those
which would have been adjacent in their columns. To make sure that
period 4 is possible, we must see numbers collectively in each of
the four columns, and this is best done by recopying the cryptogram
into its apparently possible period 4. Further examination, made
individually on each column, still shows no two numbers in any one
column whose difference, either in tens or in units, is greater than
4. It is possible, then, that each of the four columns was enciphered
with a single key; and while this is not absolute proof that the
period 4 is correct, those cases are extremely rare in which a period
found in this manner is not the correct one. With period 4 accepted,
and given as much material as we have, perhaps we can also discover
just what key-number was added to primary numbers in order to produce
each of the four alphabets. Considering alphabets one at a time, and
examining separately the tens and the units:

_Alphabet 1_: The tens-half of the first column contains a digit 2;
and since this can only have been produced by the addition of 1 and 1,
the only possible key-digit here is 1. (We have already ascertained
that all digits in this column could have had a same key.) The
units-half has a range of 4-5-6-7-8, the maximum range possible.
The smallest digit which can result in 8 is 3, and the largest which
can result in 4 is 3; that is, the only digit which can result in all
of the digits 4-5-6-7-8 is 3, so that the only possible key-digit
here is 3. Conclusion: The key which produced the first cipher
alphabet must have been 13, _since it cannot possibly be anything
else_.

_Alphabet 2_: The tens-half of the second column ranges over the
full five digits 4-5-6-7-8 (key 3), and the units-half ranges over
the digits 5-6-7-8-9 (key 4). The key which produced the second
cipher alphabet is 34.

_Alphabet 3_: The tens-half of the third column contains the
“giveaway” digit 2, and the units-half contains this digit also.
The key which produced the third cipher alphabet is 11.

_Alphabet 4_: The tens-half of the fourth column ranges only over
the digits 5-6-7-8, with nothing to indicate whether the missing one
is 4 or 9. Thus, the key to the tens might have been either 3 or 4,
though it could not have been anything else. The units have the full
range of digits, 5-6-7-8-9, key 4. In the fourth cipher alphabet,
then, we cannot tell immediately whether the key is 34 or 44.
Granting, however, that the arrangement of letters in Lindquist’s
key-square was the same as that of Fig. 136, the substitution of
letters for numbers may suggest which of the two numbers, 34 or 44,
is the correct key. With one of these we obtain letters _C O A O_,
and, with the other, _C O A T_, a word (The student might find it
of interest to decipher this cryptogram and learn what the minister
had to say).

  * * *

Any sufficiently long cryptogram, then, will reveal both its period
and its key, and this regardless of how the letters were arranged in
the encipherer’s checkerboard. It may then be deciphered with its own
key, and the case, at worst, becomes one of simple substitution. With
shorter cryptograms, we often find, as here, that some one or more of
the cipher alphabets could have had two or more possible keys. This
happening, presuming that the alphabetical arrangement of the square
is a known one, or one easily reconstructed, presents no real
problem; a little experimentation on the cryptogram will show which
keys bring out a message. When the alphabet of the square is an
unknown mixed one, the problem may vary according to length, and the
number of key-combinations which are found to be possible. If, for
instance, the case resembles that of our preceding cryptogram, where
only one alphabet out of four was in doubt, then, remembering that
the Nihilist cipher alphabets are of a kind whose frequency counts
can be “lined up,” we might take frequency counts on the several
alphabets, and supply the missing numbers of the doubtful one by
making its pattern match that of the rest. With several alphabets
in doubt, which could only happen when frequency counts are too scant
to betray their graph, it might become necessary to decipher the
periodic cryptogram with each possible combination of key-numbers,
each time obtaining a new cryptogram, and accept, among these new
cryptograms, the one whose general frequency count seems most likely
to be that of a simple substitution. The correct cryptogram, in this
case, should also contain some fresh repetitions; that is,
repetitions which were not present in the periodic one. As to the
three examples which follow, there should be little difficulty in
deciding whether or not the Nihilist cipher is represented.


131.  By B. NATURAL.

45 68 48 46 60 78 45 78 24 59 35 67 50 75 38 58 53 60 65 26 54 46 68 55 38 67 42
69 56 59 24 59 70 54 30 85 32 90 44 46 45 56 79 54 30 86 22 78 27 26 44 49 78 75
38 54 55 78 47 27 45 49 89 44 49 88 42 59 56 49 42 86 50 52 26 55 42 60 47 36 22
50 78 65 50 76 35 78 28 59 26 50 68 54 60 76 25 87 28 29 55 58 59 73 59 97 54 69
66 57 26 46 78 65 48 76 45 57 47 29 65 79 77 55 30 57 35 89 45 49 53 46 66 75 57
97 55 68 28 47 22 66 66.

132.  By PICCOLA.  (Keyword, CRYPT.  Fifth alphabet contains Q.  But:  Can you 
                    rearrange the numbers on the strip before taking frequencies?

  15 20 23 18 03  15 26 12 26 25  03 30 40 14 20  09 20 25 11 15  17 25 16 02 29
  30 25 21 18 03  11 16 27 30 26  10 02 21 17 01  06 25 13 01 25  03 30 23 26 23
  06 27 12 11 20  12 22 16 18 03  29 20 19 01 19  17 19 12 12 20  02 11 14 18 19
  13 20 38 11 23  19 01 19 01 27  30 16 21 01 23  17 24 22 25 03  19 26 21 11 28
  11 17 16 21 03  13 20 28 05 20  06 26 13 11 26  11 16 27 26 16  02 26 18 05 25
  06 03 16 03 03  30 26 16 27 28  10 02 16 02 29  06 26 27 11 24  15 20 23 13 15
  11 25 13 05 24  28 20 40 27 19  19 30 27 19 19  13 02 23 21 28  11 30 14 28 03
  18 26.

133.  By PICCOLA.  (If you recognize this gem of literature, you are beyond the
                    draft age.  It got around the censor in 1918).

20 08 17 29 15 09 01 05 08 29 24 11 06 05 10 26 13 22 06 01 18 19 05 03 16 24 13
16 04 08 07 19 12 18 24 11 17 09 07 27 26 22 01 15 21 21 10 03 06 22 03 18 04 22
20 06 07 24 12 19 10 19 10 30 10 19 16 24 13 16 04 08 23 01 10 10 23 10 09 05 08
17 21 22 09 15 21 21 10 03 06 06 21 20 12 22 21 08 18 19 23 05 02 01 11 34 19 27
12 06 02 15 10 22 03 03 02 11 12 19 10 11 19 27 13 12 18 24 19 13 24 15 07 16 16
16 26 20 04 05 11 29 26 20 03 10 19 10 23 11 16 19 13 16 04 08 25 17 05 24 20 20
23 09 10 25 20 25 02 05 07 16 26 20 04 05 11.

134.  By DAN SURR.  (Should you be worried at finding this in Daughter's boudour?)

A B C D   E F G   E H D G   E F J E   K H D   L J D G   J M M J   D G J M E
E F J E   O J E L F   A C B D G.  -  P G M G.




CHAPTER XVIII
Periodic Ciphers with Mixed Alphabets

Periodic cryptograms in which the cipher alphabets are mixed are
nearly always produced by means of slides. Before discussing these
ciphers, it may be well to clarify a few terms which otherwise could
leave room for uncertainty. We have, for instance, two, and sometimes
three, key-words. There is a primary one (sometimes two) used in the
preparation of the slide, and a secondary one, often called the
“specific” key, which is used, as in Vigenère, for the encipherment
of cryptograms. Since we shall have practically no occasion to
mention the primary key-word (or words), any references which are
made here to a key-word, unless clearly seen to refer to the
preparation of a mixed alphabet, can be understood as meaning the
secondary one, that is, the specific key which selects the cipher
alphabets. Perhaps it is also advisable to call attention once more
to the existence of a primary cipher alphabet (the basic one which is
written twice in succession on the slide) and of the 26 secondary
cipher alphabets which can be derived from it by placing it in its 26
possible positions. These are usually referred to simply as “the
alphabets,” while the basic one is more commonly called “the sliding
alphabet.” All, of course, are the same alphabet except for their
points of beginning.

To see clearly what is meant by an “equivalent slide,” the student
may make an experiment: First, form a temporary slide, using any two
26-letter alphabets, and use the slide to encipher a short message.
Now form another temporary slide on which the two alphabets of the
preceding slide (both treated by exactly the same plan) have been
rearranged so that their letters are taken at every interval 3 (or at
every interval 5, or 7, or 9 — any interval whatever that is not
divisible by 2 or 13), and with care taken always to maintain this
constant interval even when the 26th letter is reached and the 1st
reappears. Then, using this new slide in the same way as before,
encipher the same message with the same key, and compare this new
cryptogram with the first. Finally, an _alphabetical_ interval (or
distance) between two letters will mean their distance apart in the
normal alphabet, while a _lineal_ interval (or distance) will mean
their distance apart in any alphabet whatever. That is, the
_alphabetical_ distance from _A_ to _B_ is invariably 1 (position),
while their _lineal_ distance apart on a slide, or in the rows or
columns of a tableau, could be anything from 1 to 25. Where these
intervals must be mentioned often, the distance from _A_ to _B_ will
be referred to more briefly as “the distance _AB_.”

  * * *

Now let us consider the four slides of Fig. 138, which are being
designated (arbitrarily) as belonging to _Types I_, _II_, _III_, and
_IV_, in what would seem to be the order of their potential
resistance to decryptment. Their actual resistance, however, might
depend largely upon the manner of their use, and we are assuming
throughout the chapter that the encipherment process is identically
that described for the Saint-Cyr cipher: The upper alphabet, in all
cases, is to be the plaintext one; the index-letter is always the
initial one of this plaintext alphabet; and, for the encipherment of
cryptograms, the letters of the chosen key-word are to be found in
the lower alphabet and brought one by one to stand below the
index-letter in order to set up their cipher alphabets. Also, for
our immediate purposes, we are neglecting certain precautions the
advisability of which will be seen later: First, the mixed alphabets
have all been left undisturbed with their primary key-words (CULPEPER,
DAMASCUS) and their alphabetical sequences in plain view; in practice,
such alphabets ought to be carried through a transposition block, or
otherwise made to appear incoherent. Second, the index-letter should
never be _A_ (or any other frequent letter) unless the details of
encipherment are varied. (We might, for instance, consider that the
index-letter is in the sliding alphabet and that keys are in the
upper.)


                                     Figure 138

         SLIDE - TYPE I.

  Plaintext:  C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A
  CIPHER:     A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A B C.....

                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════
                                        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p .......

                                Key A:  Z Y A X E W V U T S R C Q P O D .......
                                Key B:  A Z B Y F X W V U T S D R Q P E .......
                                Key C:  B A C Z G Y X W V U T E S R Q F .......
                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════


         SLIDE - TYPE II.

  Plaintext:  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  CIPHER:     C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A C U L.....

                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════
                                        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p .......

                                Key A:  A C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O .......
                                Key B:  B A C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q .......
                                Key C:  C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N .......
                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════


         SLIDE - TYPE III.

  Plaintext:  C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A
  CIPHER:     C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A C U L.....

                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════
                                        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p .......

                                Key A:  B D A F P G H I J K M U N O Q L .......
                                Key B:  D F B G L H I J K M N C O Q S U .......
                                Key C:  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P .......
                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════


         SLIDE - TYPE IV.

  Plaintext:  D A M S C U B E F G H I J K L N O P Q R T V W X Y Z
  CIPHER:     C U L P E R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A C U L.....

                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════
                                        a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p .......

                                Key A:  C R P A Z Y X W V T S Q U O N M .......
                                Key B:  A E L B R Z Y X W V T S C Q O N .......
                                Key C:  U Z E C Y X W V T S Q O L N M K .......
                                ══════════════════════════════════════════════════


In the _Type I_ slide, the cipher alphabet is in normal order, and
“slides against” a mixed plaintext alphabet. In _Type II_, we find a
mixed cipher alphabet “sliding against” the normal one; in _Type III_,
we find this mixed cipher alphabet “sliding against” itself; and in
_Type IV_, we find it “sliding against” another, and different, mixed
alphabet. Every slide, used in any manner, has an equivalent _tableau_
and while tableaux are seldom used, it is very important that we carry
in mind a clear picture of their appearance; otherwise we shall find
it difficult to understand how slides can be restored with only
partial information. The imaginary tableau which is to serve this
purpose, using any one of the four slides in the manner specified, is
formed as follows: The plaintext alphabet, _with letters in exactly
the order of the slide_, appears at the top. The 26 cipher alphabets,
standing below and parallel to the plaintext one, are all seen in
exactly the order of the slide, _and are shifted, one letter at a
time, exactly as the normal alphabet is shifted in the Vigenère
tableau_. Thus, exactly as in Vigenère, _the columns of this imaginary
tableau are duplicates of the rows_. Keys, if considered, would repeat
the first column of such a tableau. This tableau, as mentioned, is
imaginary. Should the encipherer or the decipherer actually desire to
make use of a tableau in preference to the slide, he would probably
prefer one in which both his plaintext alphabet and his key alphabet
are running in normal order, so that letters are easier to find. To
form this tableau, he would begin by laying out, in normal order, his
plaintext alphabet and his key-alphabet, and then lay out his 26
cipher alphabets in the manner explained in connection with the
Beaufort alphabets. Each of the four slides of the figure is
accompanied by a partial tableau of this kind, and it will be noticed
there that we have only one case in which the (secondary) cipher
alphabets bear any resemblance to the primary one. This tableau, too,
should be well understood, since the cipher alphabets recovered from
cryptograms will be like those of the figure.


                                  Figure 139

           5           10          15          20          25          30
  Y V N G K   Y E G D P   Z E A Y K   H S M D Q   K K W S J   I Q V I O
        P       E I       T E A           v   c   I c           c c   v

          35           40          45          50          55          60
  K C F K Q   J P M L B   J X G K C   Z D B G N   G Q B D Q   M E O N K
  I     T c       v           I T H   T H E P     E c E   c     E

          65           70          75          80          85          90
  X T Y A D   D D G J R   X R X F W   G D A Y T   Q S G G C   G P B Y O
        H       H I                   E H A           I P H   E   E   v

          95          100         105         110         115         120
  C L W K C   B I C F E   Z D G J W   K U F K C   B U I Z Y   B K E K C
        T H   A           T H I       I c   T H   A c   E     A c   T H

          125         130         135         140         145         150
  G K T A O   Q C B Y Q   U U F Z G   G Z Y F N   F M J V Z   B L Q J U
  E c   H v       E   c     c   E     E                 v     A

          155         160         165         170         175         180
  V M M J T   A E F V S   M E N K Q   J E I Z Y   A L Q Y R   X R X F R
      v       W E   v       E   T c     E   E     W

          185         190         195         200         205         210
  O U F V S   V V V V P   K T B K C   G O M I K   B Q V Z N   B I N A O
    c   v         c v     I   E T H   E   v       A c c E     A     H v

          215         220         225         230         235         240
  C E V V J   F V U Z S   B K M K C   G P M D T   K K Y A D   D D Y Z C
    E c v           E     A c v T H   E   v       I c   H       H   E H

          245         250         255         260         265         270
  B T K V S   G Q W I T   Z D A K P   G W B I O   N D G R C   H P B H U
  A   M v     E c         T H A T     E   E   v     H I   H       E

          275         280         285         290         295         300
  G K T Q H   G U V Z N   Y X M L H   F S M D Q   K K W Z Q   U D A M T
  E c         E c c E         v           v   c   I c   E c     H A

          305         310         315         320         325         330
  Z D B J O   P E U L R   Y U G K U   Z E U S J   Z D B O D   R E S I O
  T H E   v     E           c I T     T E         T H E         E     v

          335         340         345
  R L A B L   J R S Z Q   Y Q V F L
      A L           E c     c c


  * * *

Of our four slides, only the _Type I_ is radically different from the
rest. Since its basic cipher alphabet is not a mixed one, it makes
little difference what has been done to its plaintext alphabet.
Notice, in the partial tableau which accompanies it, that the
difference between one cipher alphabet and another is purely a matter
of alphabetical shift (or of “size,” if we wish to replace all of
these letters with numbers). Properly speaking, this cipher belongs
to the case of the preceding chapter; it is presented here largely as
a warning of what could happen through misuse of the _Type I_ slide.
In the remaining three cases, the sliding alphabet is a mixed one; a
series of frequency counts taken from cryptograms cannot be “lined up”
unless letters can be placed in the right order before these frequency
counts are taken. The “right” order may be the original one of the
cipher alphabet, or an equivalent order in which the original letters
are taken at a constant interval. In these cases, as with any other
periodic cipher, the period is found in the usual way. Individual
frequency counts are then taken on the several cipher alphabets, and
these are examined in the hope of finding a known alphabetical graph;
that is, the graph of some mixed alphabet recovered from previous
decryptments — (but notice also the _C_-alphabet under the _Type III_
slide!). It can also be ascertained whether or not the frequency
counts have followed one common graph, whether any two or more have
followed one graph, and so on. But when it is found that the frequency
counts are those of unknown mixed alphabets, then each alphabet is to
be treated by simple substitution methods. Here, the principles will
still be those of Chapter IX, and we will examine, as briefly as
possible, the mechanical phases of their application.

Our cryptogram, shown in Fig. 139, is already written into its
correct period, 5, with a few substitutions already made, and a few
letters noted as vowels or consonants (_v_-_c_). With the period
determined as 5, and alphabets found to be in an unknown mixed order,
our next step is the preparation of a contact sheet (contact chart,
contact count) for each one of the five alphabets, the usual form
being that shown in Fig. 140. The necessary number of sheets is
prepared in advance by writing the normal alphabet through the
center, and each is numbered to show what alphabet it represents.
It may also carry the numbers of the two contacting alphabets (those
in parentheses in the figure). Then, if the cryptogram is properly
grouped, so that all first letters of groups belong to alphabet 1,
all second letters to alphabet 2, and so on, the putting down of
contact letters is very rapid.

Illustrating with alphabet 2: Start with its first letter, _V_; find
_V_ in the prepared alphabet numbered 2; place on its left side the
_Y_ of alphabet 1; place on its right side the _N_ of alphabet 3.
Pass on to the next letter, _E_: contacts are _Y_-_G_. Pass on to the
third letter, another _E_: contacts are _Z_-_A_. And so on to the end
of alphabet 2. Each contact chart, of course, will serve also as a
frequency count and as a graph. The five graphs should now be
compared with one another in the hope that some two or more may
represent the same alphabet. Such a key-word as DENSE, for instance,
makes use twice of the _E_-alphabet, thus doubling the amount of
material in one of the alphabets. In our present case, it is found
that the five alphabets are all different. Now, just as in simple
substitution, we wish to determine, for each of the five alphabets,
what letters are apparently representing vowels, and what letters are
more likely to be consonants. For this purpose, some of our
“pointers” are still available, and are just as valid as in
Chapter IX.


                                          Figure 140

               (5)  1  (2)                                      (1)  2  (3)

                YT  A  EL                                            A
          CSNKZYCC  B  IUKLQIKT                                      B
                OO  C  LE                                        QK  C  FB
                DD  D  DD                                ZZUNZDZGDZ  D  BGAGYAGABB
                    E                                    RZPCJMAMZY  E  GAOFNIVUUS
               HJN  F  MVS                                           F
       HUPSCCGCCWN  G  QDPKZOPQWKU                                   G
                CK  H  SP                                            H
                 J  I  Q                                         BB  I  CN
              LQBQ  J  PXER                                          J
            QTPWOQ  K  KCUTKK                               KGKBGBK  K  WETMYTW
                    L                                          RABC  L  WQQA
                SQ  M  EE                                        VF  M  JM
                 O  N  D                                             N
                 R  O  U                                          G  O  M
                 O  P  E                                       HGGJ  P  MBMB
                OT  Q  SC                                     YGBGI  Q  VBVWV
                OD  R  EL                                       JXX  R  XXS
                    S                                           FQH  S  MGM
                    T                                           BKX  T  YBK
                QQ  U  UD                                    YGOUBK  U  FIFFVG
                SU  V  MV                                       FVY  V  NVU
                    W                                             G  W  B
               RRK  X  TRR                                       YJ  X  GM
             QRNK*  Y  VEXUQ                                         Y
           JUTTECP  Z  EDDDDED                                    G  Z  Y

        (2)  3  (4)                       (3)  4  (5)                (4)  5  (1)

      LDDDE  A  YYKMB                    YNTY  A  DOOD                    A
  DDPWTCPQD  B  GDYYKIHJO                   A  B  L                    L  B  J
          I  C  F                              C               RZKKKKKGK  C  ZGBBGGGBH
             D                          MMBMG  D  PQQTQ              OAA  D  DDR
          K  E  K                              E                       F  E  Z
      UEUUC  F  KKZVV                   VXYCX  F  WENRL                   F
    UDDSDXE  G  DKJGJRK                   GBN  G  KNC                  Z  G  G
             H                              B  H  U                   LQ  H  GF
         EU  I  ZZ                      SBWMV  I  OKTOO                   I
          M  J  V                       BMQGG  J  RWUTO              SVS  J  IFZ
          T  K  V                  GAMBMEFWGF  K  QCCCCQCCPU        INYG  K  YHXB
             L                            UMM  L  BHR                 FB  L  J*
   SXPKOMPS  M  DLJIKDLD                    A  M  T                       M
        IEV  N  GKA                         O  N  K                 ZZFG  N  GFBY
          E  O  N                           B  O  D              IJIAAYI  O  KCQCNPR
             P                                 P                     KVD  P  ZKG
         LL  Q  JY                          T  Q  H             ZZDKYDKD  Q  KJMUJKUY
             R                              G  R  C                 LFYJ  R  XXOY
         RE  S  IZ                         UW  S  JJ                VZVV  S  MVBG
         KK  T  AQ                             T                   MIDJY  T  QAKZZ
        EEV  U  ZLS                            U                     KHJ  U  VGZ
     QUEQVQ  V  IVZVZF                 KVVFFJ  V  ZSSPJS                  V
       KQLK  W  SKIZ                           W                      JF  W  GK
         RR  X  FF                             X                          X
       DKZT  Y  AFAZ                    QBBAA  Y  KTOQR               ZZ  Y  BA
             Z                      SWVYUVIFI  Z  YGYNSCNQQ            V  Z  B




                                    Figure 141

                        Consideration of Alphabet No. 1

  Letter:    Frequency:       LOW-FREQUENCY CONTACTS      VARIETY OF CONTACT
                               Left  Right   Total*       Left Right Total*
  B (v)           7              2     3        5           6    6      12
  G (v)(= E?)    11              5     3        8           8    8      16
  K (v)           6              2     1        3           5    4       9
  Z (c)           7              4     -        4           6    2       8

  (*)  These observations are not absolute, as in simple substitution.


In Fig. 141 we may see some data and probable conclusions concerning
alphabet 1. By frequency alone, the four letters _B_, _G_, _K_, _Z_,
of this alphabet might all be vowels. When variety of contact is
considered in conjunction with frequency, it is noted that _Z_ shows
no variety on its right. And when contacts with low-frequency letters
are also considered (from information present on sheets 5 and 2; in
the figure, frequencies of 1, 2, or 3 were considered to be low), it
is found that in this respect, too, the letter _Z_ stands apart from
the others. These observations, usually, are mental, and conclusions
for any one alphabet must often be modified by what is seen in other
alphabets. It may be found satisfactory to begin by selecting only
the most _obvious vowel_, or vowels, in each alphabet, and to circle
these, or otherwise indicate them, not only on their own sheets, but
also on the two adjacent sheets where they are found again as contact
letters. When this has been done, the less obvious vowels may be
considered again with an additional “pointer,” whether or not they
show too much contact with the more obvious vowels. Fig. 142 shows,
for each alphabet, the probable conclusions which would be reached
after examining the contact sheets of Fig. 140, and before any
confirmation is attempted. The next step in order is that of
indicating them on the cryptogram itself, and the examination of long
segments in which no vowels have been marked. At this stage, too, the
total number of spotted vowels may be computed to find out how much
of the expected 40% is still missing. Up to this point we have
nothing new, and nothing particularly difficult. Whether or not the
subsequent work is to become difficult depends chiefly upon the
amount of material per alphabet, though granting that the presence of
probable words materially alters the case of the shorter cryptogram.


                          Figure 142

              Conclusions for the Five Alphabets

          Alphabet No.      Vowels        Consonants

             1              B G K *         Z
             2              E               D K Q U
             3              B G M *         V
             4              V Z             K
             5              O               C Q

  (*)  When B and G appear as vowels in two different alphabets,
  the graphic appearance of these two alphabets (1 and 3) should
  be given another inspection.  It happens they are not the same.


If the most frequent of the spotted vowels in each alphabet can be
safely assumed as _e_, the establishment of other vowel-identities
can follow the rules of Chapter IX: The high-frequency vowel which
practically never touches _e_ is _o_; and the one which follows it
is _a_; vowels of lower frequency may precede or follow _e_, but no
vowel should touch it very often. And if, in addition, the most
frequent of the spotted consonants in a given alphabet can be safely
assumed as _t_, then _h_ of the next alphabet will seldom be out of
reach. A very material aid here is found in those _repeated digrams_
(and trigrams) whose letters are already labeled as vowels or
consonants. We find, for instance, _ZD_, alphabets 1-2, occurring
five times, and with both letters already spotted as consonants.
This is very likely to represent _th_, especially when further
examination shows it continued as a repeated _ZDB_, with _B_ already
quite likely to represent the _e_ of alphabet 3. Then the contacts of
_D_, alphabet 2, supposed to represent _h_, have also pointed out a
probable new vowel, _A_, in alphabet 3. Again, we find _KC_,
alphabets 4-5, occurring six times, and with both letters already
spotted as consonants — another probable _th_ — followed three times
by _G_, alphabet 1, already likely to represent _e_, and twice by
_B_, which could thus represent _a_ (the famous English _the_, _tha_).
And similarly we might continue with a long demonstration.

  * * *

Returning, now, to our mechanical operations: Dealing, as we are,
with five different alphabets, it becomes imperative that we keep
track of substitutes; otherwise, with all of our numerous trials and
erasures, it is almost impossible to know what substitutes have been
identified and what substitutes are still available for
identification. Also, totally apart from this matter of convenience,
we shall probably want these five lists of substitutes for use on
future cryptograms. This applies to any series of cipher alphabets,
whether or not they are in any way related to one another. But it is
very seldom indeed that a series of cipher alphabets used in the same
cryptogram will be unrelated alphabets. Nearly always, they will have
resulted from the use of a slide, and when this is true, the recovery
of alphabets and parts of alphabets enables us to reconstruct the
slide. The usual plan for recording substitutes is to lay out a
plaintext alphabet in _A B C_ order and then, directly below it, to
rule off several rows of cells, one row for each cipher alphabet.
Thus, any substitute, identified in any alphabet, may be written
directly below its presumed original and on the row which corresponds
to its particular cipher alphabet. We sometimes speak of such a
set-up as a “key-frame” or “key-skeleton,” though a better name,
probably, would be “partial tableau.” (Every row, if completed, will
show one cipher alphabet of the kind we saw in the partial tableaux
of Fig. 138.) Such a “key-frame” for our present cryptogram can be
seen in Fig. 143. At (a) of this figure we have the first tentative
identifications. The most frequent vowel in each of the first four
cipher alphabets has been assumed as _e_ (in practice, the _O_ of
alphabet 5 would also be assumed as _e_). The _ZD_ of alphabets 1-2
and the _KC_ of alphabets 4-5 have both been assumed as _th_, and
after each _th_, we are trying one letter as _a_. The five rows of
this set-up we may now speak of as “alphabets.” At (b) we are
beginning to speculate as to what kind of slide has been used.

Suppose that the cryptogram has been enciphered with a _Type II_
slide. If so, our plaintext alphabet, in the key-frame, is already
arranged like the one on the slide; and when this is true, as may be
seen by glancing back at Fig. 138, the recovered cipher alphabets
will also build up with their letters in exactly the same order as
that of the slide, and, in the end, if fully completed, will show a
picture of the original sliding alphabet taking five of its possible
positions.

Examining the first cipher alphabet of (a), we note that the _lineal_
distance from _B_ to _G_ is 4 positions. If our hypothesis is correct,
then the lineal distance _BG_ will have to be 4 positions in all of
the other alphabets. The third alphabet contains a _B_; measuring 4
positions to the right of this letter, we find that _G_ of the third
alphabet would fall below _i_, and thus would be the substitute for
_i_ in the third alphabet. To see whether or not this is likely, we
return to the contact sheet, where we find that _G_ has already been
spotted as a vowel (see the list in Fig. 142). So far, so good. Then,
the first cipher alphabet of (a) shows the lineal distance _BZ_ as
19 positions. Returning to the third alphabet, and measuring 19
positions to the right of _B_, we find that _Z_, in this alphabet,
would fall below _x_. Examination of the contact chart shows that
_Z_ has not been used in the third alphabet, making it satisfactory
as the substitute for _x_. Still good. Again, the third alphabet
shows the distance _AB_ as 4 positions. Still pursuing our hypothesis,
the first alphabet must also contain an _A_ standing 4 positions to
the left of _B_. If so, it will fall below _w_, and the frequency of
_A_, in the first alphabet is found to be 2, which is satisfactory as
that of _w_. With _G_ and _Z_ added to alphabet 3, and with _A_ added
to alphabet 1, we may now turn our attention to alphabet 4, which
contains a _Z_, and, by making similar observations there, we may add
to the 4th cipher alphabet the letters _A B G_, and, to the 1st and
3d alphabets, the letter _K_. Thus we arrive at (b) through what is
ordinarily referred to as the “symmetry of position” existing among
the several cipher alphabets.


                                  Figure 143

  (a)
                  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z  
          1 -     B       G                             Z              
          2 -             E     D                                      
          3 -     A       B                                            
          4 -             Z                             K              
          5 -                   C                                      

  (b)
                  a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z  
          1 -     B       G       K                     Z     A        
          2 -             E     D                                      
          3 -     A       B       G       K                     Z      
          4 -             Z     A       B       G       K              
          5 -                   C                                      


But the second and fifth alphabets cannot yet be combined with the
other three, since neither of these contains any letter in common
with them, and thus we have no point from which to measure lineal
distances. We know, however, that if our hypothesis is correct, the
letters _A B G K Z_, in these alphabets also, will be found at
exactly the same lineal distances as before. It would be possible to
prepare a sort of slide on which these letters, written twice in
succession, are spaced as in the other three alphabets, and use this
in experimenting with alphabets 2 and 5.

The cryptogram, as we first saw it, showed all substitutions which
are possible from (b) of Fig. 143, together with a few _v_-_c_
notations which were listed in Fig. 142 but not further investigated.
In case the student cares to complete solution, he might refer to
certain precautions mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
Notice, in the last figure, the lineal distance from _G_ to _K_;
what letters would you feel inclined to try in the three intervening
positions? Or notice the distance _BG_. What letter is very likely
to have been taken here for use in the key-word, and where is it
likely to stand in that word? If the index-letter was _A_, does it
seem possible that the _a_-substitutes could all be selected in
advance directly from the contact sheets? Would this be possible if
the encipherment process were varied so that an index, selected in
the sliding alphabet, were brought to stand below keys in the
stationary one? The cryptogram is known to contain the word SUPPOSE,
and the period is 5. Is there any room here for _pattern_ methods?

  * * *

Our _Type II_ slide, then, unlike the remaining three, builds up
automatically in the key-frame, _owing to the simple fact that we
are able to set down the plaintext alphabet in the encipherer’s
original order_. The method of solution, so far as we know, was
first published (1883) by Auguste Kerckhoffs, who seems to have
originated the term “symmetry of position.” The invention of the
cipher is credited to “a member of the (French) Commission on
Military Telegraphy.”

If these parallel cipher alphabets are to be avoided in the
key-frame, but still using a _Type II_ slide, General Sacco has
suggested that the encipherment process be altered as follows: Let
the index-letter and the key-letter both be found in the upper
alphabet. Slide the plaintext letter to stand below the index-letter,
and use the substitute which will then be standing below the
key-letter. This, of course, would have to be letter-by-letter
encipherment, and represents one of those rare cases in which a
slide is less convenient and rapid than its equivalent tableau. If
this tableau be laid out in full, as explained for Beaufort alphabets,
it shows, on its 26 rows, 26 cipher alphabets not one of which appears
to be at all related to the others. One of these (the one in which
index-letter and key-letter are the same) will be the normal alphabet.
We may find the original sliding alphabet, however, by looking at
_columns_. Such a tableau is exactly equivalent to the _Delastelle
tableau_ if the _Z_-alphabet be made the normal one. Delastelle’s
tableau was described as follows: Using the mixed alphabet, fill in
the tableau by columns, beginning each column with whatever letter,
in the mixed alphabet, follows the plaintext letter shown above the
column. This causes the final alphabet to come out in _A B C_ order.
The Delastelle tableau is not nearly so easy to reconstruct as that
of the ordinary _Type II_ slide; the method, however, will be plain
enough when we have understood the reconstruction of _Types III_ and
_IV_.

  * * *

The _Type I_ slide, as pointed out in the beginning, is somewhat out
of place in the present chapter; every frequency count will follow
the graph of the mixed plaintext alphabet, so that all can be “lined
up” by their common pattern. Having letters, and not numbers, the
“top” of a frequency count may be anywhere; it is usually best to
prepare at least one of the frequency counts of double length in
order to effect the alignment. Granting, however, that for some
reason the common pattern of the frequency counts has not been
recognized, then the method of decryptment would be exactly the same
as for any other case of mixed alphabets.

Fig. 144 shows the development of the key-frame in this case. At (a),
some substitutes have been correctly identified in each of four cipher
alphabets. But long before reaching this stage, the most careless of
decryptors must have noticed that the difference between any two
cipher alphabets is purely a matter of alphabetical shift. This is
particularly visible as between alphabets 3 and 4, where the
alphabetical interval is only 1; examination of alphabets 1 and 2
shows that wherever both substitutes are present, their alphabetical
difference is 14; and further examination shows that the alphabetical
distance from alphabet 2 to alphabet 3 is 17. The use, here, of a
Saint-Cyr slide enables us to arrive very quickly at (b). The
alphabets of (b) are, of course, secondary cipher alphabets, and the
primary one obviously runs in normal order (or, at worst, in a
strictly methodized order which is easily obtainable from the normal
one). What we still lack, in order to reconstruct the slide, is the
mixed plaintext alphabet, and this can be recovered as at (c). Write
out the normal alphabet (known to be the original cipher alphabet),
then, using any one of the secondary alphabets, place originals above
their substitutes wherever these are known. In the given example, all
missing letters can be filled in by alphabetical sequence; and even
though the index-letter was one of low frequency, and thus was not
used in the message, the student should have no trouble whatever in
discovering the key-word which governs the four cipher alphabets.

  * * *

In considering the reconstruction of the remaining two slides, we
shall have to keep clearly in mind the _imaginary tableau_ on which
the plaintext alphabet has exactly the order of the one on the slide,
so that cipher alphabets, also, have exactly the order of the one on
the slide, and are shifted one letter at a time, as in the Vigenère
tableau. For one thing, we are going to call some of these alphabets
by numbers, or refer to them as odd-numbered and even-numbered
alphabets. Thus, with the alphabet we have been using, the _first_
alphabet in the imaginary tableau is position 1 of the slide:
_C U L P E R Z Y X W V T_. . . . . . , the _second_ alphabet is
position 2 of the slide: _U L P E R Z_. . . . . . . , the _third_
alphabet is position 3 of the slide: _L P E R Z Y_. . . . . , and so
on to the _26th_ alphabet, which is the final position of the slide:
_A C U L_. . . . . But over and above this, it must be remembered
that _the columns of this imaginary tableau are duplicates of the
rows_, just as they are in the Vigenère tableau. We do not, of course,
recover any of these alphabets in the order mentioned, since our
plaintext alphabet of the key-frame must necessarily be arranged in
its _a_-_b_-_c_ order. For instance, the _fourth_ alphabet, which,
in the imaginary tableau, begins with its key-letter, _P_, and runs
in the order _P E R Z Y X W V T_. . . . . , comes out in one of our
examples (_Type III_ slide) as _L U P C Y A B D_. . . . . , and in
the other (_Type IV_ slide) as _E W Y P V T S_. . . .


                                    Figure 144

  The Alphabets from a  TYPE I  Slide:

       (a)
                     a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z

              1 -    L . . J Q . H G F . . . . B A . . R Y X . . . . . .
              2 -    Z . . . E . . . T . . C Q . O . . . . . B . . . . .
              3 -    Q P . O V N . . . . I . . G F U . . D C . B A . Y .
              4 -    R . . P W . . M L . J . . . G . . . . D . . . . . .

       (b)
                     a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z

              1 -    L K . J Q I H G F . D O C B A P . R Y X N W V . T .
              2 -    Z Y . X E W V U T . R C Q P O D . F M L B K J . H .
              3 -    Q P . O V N M L K . I T H G F U . W D C S B A . Y .
              4 -    R Q . P W O N M L . J U I H G V . X E D T C B . Z .

  (c)  Alphabet No. 1:

   Plaintext:            o n m k . i h g f d b a . u l p e r . y . w v t s .
   CIPHER (Rearranged):  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z


  * * *

The _Type III_ slide is, in many respects, the most interesting
member of its family. With every alphabet taking exactly the same
order (that is, the plaintext alphabet, the key-alphabet, and all
cipher alphabets in the imaginary tableau), it parallels the Vigenère
in every particular except the order of the 26 letters. It has a
corresponding Beaufort form, and a corresponding variant in which
complementary keys are based on the order of the mixed alphabet. Its
14th alphabet, like the _N_-alphabet of the Vigenère, is reciprocal
throughout. And its first alphabet, like the _A_-alphabet of the
Vigenère, is a duplicate of the plaintext alphabet. This was pointed
out in connection with the slide of Fig. 138, where key-letter and
index-letter were both _C_. There are two ciphers, then (the _Type
III_ slide and the Delastelle tableau), in which we are sometimes
able to find, among a number of mixed frequency counts, a single one
which follows perfectly the graph of the Vigenère _A_-alphabet.
Concerning the 14th alphabet, however, we are dealing altogether,
here, with a 26-letter alphabet; and some of what follows is being
explained on the theory that the number 26 contains no factors other
than 2 and 13. If the student will give his careful attention to
_reasons_, as well as to methods, he will be able to adjust these
methods to alphabets of other lengths, as, for instance, the very
common 25-letter alphabet met with in foreign texts. The first
alphabet, of course, duplicates the plaintext alphabet regardless of
what alphabet-length is being considered, and thus, whenever a
_Type III_ slide has been used, we are always in full possession of
one of the cipher alphabets.


                                      Figure 145

  The Alphabets from a TYPE III Slide:

                          Behavior of an EVEN-NUMBERED Alphabet

  1st Alphabet (Always normal):  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  4th Alphabet:                  L U P C Y A B D F G H R I J K Z M X N O E Q S T V W

  For an EQUIVALENT SLIDE, follow the chain  AL-LR-RX-XT-TO......

                    A L R X T O K H D C P Z W S N J G B U E Y V Q M I F
                    L R X T O K H D C P Z W S N J G B U E Y V Q M I F A
         (1)........... ═                 ═                 ═
         (2)................. ═══       ═══     ═══       ═══     ═══

  To find the ORIGINAL SLIDE from the EQUIVALENT one:

  (1)  Either take letters constantly at interval 9, which is the interval V-W-X:

                    R Z Y X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A C U L P E (R)
                    X W V T S Q O N M K J I H G F D B A C U L P E R Z Y (X)

  (2)  Or:  Spread the letters apart so that the alphabetical sequences K(JI)H, Z(YX)W,
       etc. are standing at the right interval, always maintaining the alphabet-length,
       26, and intertwine.  Both alphabets are the same in this slide:

  (The interbals    A . . L . . R . . X . . T . . O . . K . . H . . D .
  are always odd,   . C . . P . . Z . . W . . S . . N . . J . . G . . B
  3, 5, 7, etc.)    . . U . . E . . Y . . V . . Q . . M . . I . . F . .

                          Behavior of an ODD-NUMBERED Alphabet

  1st Alphabet:              A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  3d  Alphabet:              U C L A Z B D F G H I E J K M R N Y O Q P S T V W X

              1st HALF-CHAIN:                     2d HALF-CHAIN:
       A U P R Y W T Q N K I G D (A)      B C L E Z X V S O M J H F (B)

  Spread the letters of each half, trying interval 2, interval 4, interval 6, and so
  on, treating both halves alike, until the intertwining of the two will set up some
  alphabetical sequences:

                     . A . U . P . R . Y . W . T . Q . N . K . I . G . D
                     B . C . L . E . Z . X . V . S . O . M . J . H . F .


Now, granting that we have completed the decryptment of a message, we
have before us a key-frame in which several cipher alphabets are at
least partially recovered. With one alphabet fully known in advance,
the recovery of another full alphabet usually enables us very quickly
to restore the original slide, or an equivalent slide. The ideal case
is that in which we recover one of the even-numbered alphabets (except
No. 14). The recovery of an odd-numbered alphabet will, at times,
leave us with thirteen possibilities; while the recovery of the 14th
alphabet could be useless, provided we have no other information. The
method of reconstruction can be followed in Fig. 145.

First, we have the perfect case, one in which an even-numbered
alphabet (the 4th) has been recovered in full. We begin by writing
this recovered cipher alphabet letter for letter below (or above)
the one which is always known to us; thus the two substitutes for
_a_ are in a same column, the two substitutes for _b_ are in a same
column, the two substitutes for _c_ are in a same column, and so on.
The columns themselves are not in their original order, but the two
alphabets, throughout, are running parallel, just as they would in
the imaginary tableau, and thus the _columnar distance is uniform_
which separates each pair of substitutes; that is, the _vertical_
distances _AL_, _BU_, _CP_, _DC_, _EY_, etc., are all equal in the
imaginary tableau. If these be rearranged in such a way that the
last letter of each pair is the beginning letter of the next, we
have a chain _AL_-_LR_-_RX_-_XT_-_TO_-_OK_. . . . . made up entirely
of equal vertical intervals, from which the repeated letters may be
dropped: _A L R X T_. . . . . , leaving us a series of 26 letters
known to be equally spaced in the columns of the tableau. Then,
remembering that the columns of this tableau are duplicates of its
rows, we have also a series of 26 letters known to be equally spaced
on the rows. That this series of letters, _A L R X T_. . . . ,
_sliding against itself_, produces exactly the results of the
original series, the student may ascertain for himself; also that a
number of other _equivalent slides_ can be formed by taking letters
of this series at any constant interval which is not divisible by 2
or 13. The total number possible is eleven, of which one was the
original. An equivalent slide, of course, is all that we actually
need for enciphering and deciphering cryptograms. But where
alphabetical sequences existed in the original alphabet, two methods
are shown for obtaining it without writing out the entire eleven
possibilities: (1) Find, at some constant interval, the letters of
an alphabetical, or nearly alphabetical, sequence, as the (reversed)
_V W X_ of the figure, standing at interval 9; the taking of all
letters at this interval brings back the original order. (2) Find
pairs of consecutive letters, as the (reversed) _HK_, _WZ_, _GJ_,
which, if all spread apart to the same extent (some odd interval, as
3 of the figure), would then be standing at their normal alphabetical
intervals, or nearly so. Lay out the 26 positions, and spread the
entire alphabet, maintaining the common interval even after the 26th
position is reached. The figure shows this on several rows; in
practice, there is only one.

If the recovered alphabet is an odd-numbered one, the same plan is
followed, but results in a chain of only 13 letters; it is necessary
to begin with some other letter, not included among the first 13, and
form another 13-letter chain. Having absolutely no additional
information, we cannot combine these two halves with certainty unless
the original alphabet contained some alphabetical, or nearly
alphabetical sequences. Presuming that it did, the method ordinarily
described for combining the two halves is that of the figure. Spread
the letters of the two halves (plan 2 of the preceding case),
treating both halves exactly alike, until a point is found at which
the two halves can be intercombined to show alphabetical sequences.

For this case, however, George C. Lamb, the author of Chapter X,
suggests another plan which would seem to be more direct and less
troublesome than the standard one. Lamb, incidentally, is to be
congratulated here for his entirely new observation: If the two
half-chains can be properly adjusted with reference to each other,
_each pair of letters, regardless of the order, will be a digram
belonging to the original mixed alphabet_. The reason for this
division into halves, of the odd-numbered alphabets, is probably
self-evident: One half contains only odd letters (1-3-5-7-9.
. . . . . . . .) and the other contains only even letters
(2-4-6-8-10. . . . . . .). If both halves were recovered in this
order, and if one half were written directly below the other with
letters 1-2 standing together, then the other pairs would also be
standing together: 3-4, 5-6, 7-8, and so on. We seldom recover them
in straight order; but whatever rearrangement has taken place in one
of the halves has taken place, also, in the other half; should one be
recovered with letters in the order 1-7-13-19-25-5-11. . . . (each
third letter in a series 1-3-5-7. . . . .), then the other will be
recovered with letters in the order 2-8-14-20. . . . . . (each third
letter in a series 2-4-6. . . . . .), though neither half necessarily
begins with the first letter of its series. If, then, we are able to
place together letters 1-2, the other pairs will also be adjusted,
perhaps in the order 1-2, 7-8, 13-14, 19-20, and so on. These pairs
may then be taken at some regular interval and will bring back the
original order 1-2, 3-4, 5-6, and so on.


                                   Figure 146

  Another Method for Combining the two Half-Chains of an Odd-Numbered Alphabet

                         (Originated by GEORGE C. LAMB)

  With a Type III slide, based on the key-word EXCORIATE, the 7th alphabet, as
  recovered from a cryptogram would come out as shown:  H K B L A M N P........

                  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
                  H K B L A M N P G Q S U V W D Y Z F E J X C O T R I

  The second half-chain, started with D, must be re-adjusted so as to plece in
  correspondence the alphabetical sequences PQ, YZ, FG, MN, etc.

          1st HALF-CHAIN:           A H P Y R F M V C B K S E
          2d  HALF-CHAIN: (d l u x) T J Q Z I G N W O D L U X

  Each corresponding pair of letters was a digram in the original cipher alphabet.
  Taking some two letters, as FG, which form an alphabetical sequence, look for
  another pair, such as HJ, which may be its continuation.  HJ having been found
  at the interval 9, try taking pairs at the interval 9:

                FG  HJ  KL  MN  PQ  SU  VW  YZ  EX  CO  RI  AT  BD  (FG)


Lamb’s method, applied to an actual cipher alphabet, can be seen in
Fig. 146. The first half-chain, if started at _A_, will include the
letters _B_ and _C_, so that the second half-chain would probably
have been started at _D_. But _AD_ will not be a correctly adjusted
digram. It is necessary to look for one which forms an alphabetical
sequence, as _FG_; and when the two halves are adjusted so that _F_
and _G_ are together, other alphabetical, or nearly alphabetical,
sequences are also found to be adjusted, as _MN_, _VW_, _BD_, _KL_,
making it likely that we have found some digrams belonging to the
original mixed alphabet. With this adjustment reached, it is found
that pairs can be taken at the constant interval 9,
_AT_-_BD_-_FG_-_HJ_. . . . . , thus bringing back the original cipher
alphabet.

Presuming that the original alphabet did not contain these
alphabetical sequences, then there are thirteen possible adjustments
for the two half-chains, and any one of these could be the original
alphabet (or its equivalent). But it must not be forgotten that in
an actual case our key-frame always contains portions of other cipher
alphabets; and if the foregoing principle has been well understood,
it may be readily seen how we could make use of these in order to
determine which of the thirteen possible adjustments is correct.
Even the recovery of the 14th cipher alphabet (which results in
thirteen 2-letter chains), would not be useless with this other
information present always in every key-frame. The _Type III_ slide,
in fact, can often be reconstructed without possessing any fully
recovered cipher alphabet. This cipher is very popular with members
of the American Cryptogram Association, and is usually known, for no
very good reason, as “the Quagmires cipher.”

  * * *

In the case of the _Type IV_ slide, we do not begin reconstruction
with one complete cipher alphabet already in our possession. It
becomes necessary that we recover two, the perfect case being that
in which one is an odd-numbered alphabet and the other an
even-numbered one. We will follow this case in Fig. 147, where the
two recovered alphabets are Nos. 4 and 7. This tableau, like the
preceding one, has columns which are duplicates of its rows, and to
see our preceding case again (with its one modification), let us
begin by looking only at the three alphabets immediately below the
heading. One of these, the plaintext alphabet, shown in lower-case
letters, we will disregard for a moment, giving our attention only
to the two cipher alphabets.


                                     Figure 147

  The Alphabets from a  TYPE IV  Slide:

  Plaintext letters:    a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
  (1)  4th Alphabet:    E W Y P V T S Q O N M K R J I H G F Z D X B A C U L
  (2)  7th Alphabet:    Y S V Z Q O N M K J I H X G F D B A W C T U L P E R

                A CHAIN Started with  ab

  ab ys vd qx nt jp gl bi sf du xm tz pw lr io fk uh me zc wa ry ov kq hn ej cg (ab)
  EW UZ BP GC JD NH SK WO ZT PX CR DL HA EF OI TM XQ RV LY AE FU IB MG QJ VN YS

                REARRANGEMENT of this CHAIN:

  ab bi io ov vd du uh hn nt tz zc cg gl lr ry ys sf fk kq qx xm me ej jp pw wa
  EW WO OI IB BP PX XQ QJ JD DL LY YS SK KF FU UZ ZT TM MG GC CR RV VN NH HA AE

  A Reconstructed EQUIVALENT Slide:

          Plaintext:   a b i o v d u h n t z c g l r y s f k q x m e j p w
          CIPHER:      E W O I B P X Q J D L Y S K F U Z T M G C R V N H A

  ORIGINAL Slide, Found by Taking Letters at the Interval 5:

                             b u c s m a d z y x w v t .......
                             W X Y Z R E P L U C A B D .......


These two alphabets, like the two from the Type _III_ slide, are
running parallel in the imaginary tableau, so that we have, as
before, a series of 26 _vertical_ distances, _EY_, _WS_, _YV_, and
so on, all known to be equal in the columnar direction and therefore
known to be equal distances on any row. A chain may be started,
exactly as in the other case, _EY_, _YV_, _VQ_, _QM_, _MI_. . . . . ,
resulting in a series of equally-spaced letters _E Y V Q M I F A L R_.
. . . . . which is either the original cipher alphabet, or the
original one with letters taken at some odd interval other than 13.
It is, however, only the _cipher alphabet_; the mixed _plaintext
alphabet_ must still be found. This may be done, as in the case of
the _Type I_ plaintext alphabet, by using either of the two cipher
alphabets which were first recovered and setting originals above
their substitutes. If this is done with our cipher alphabet in the
order _E Y V Q M I F A L R_. . . . . . , then the plaintext alphabet
comes out in the order _a c e h k o r w z m_. . . . . . , and we have
an equivalent slide. If we first rearrange the sliding alphabet (each
9th letter of the series _E Y V Q_. . . .), we obtain the plaintext
alphabet also rearranged.

Continuing, now, with the rest of our figure: The method we have just
seen was based on a tableau, and our equal intervals were all
vertical. In the figure, we are dealing purely with horizontal
distances, and our method is based, not on a tableau, but on a
_slide_ (as it was with the _Type II_). Our 4th and 7th (secondary)
cipher alphabets, after all, are merely two different positions of
the same slide. If we select any two letters, as _a_ and _b_ of the
plaintext alphabet, and find that their substitutes are, respectively,
_E_ and _W_, in alphabet 4, then the lineal distance _ab_ in the
stationary alphabet must be exactly equal to the lineal distance _EW_
in the sliding one; if this were not true, the letters could not have
coincided as they do. Then, if we find the same substitutes, _E_ and
_W_, in alphabet 7, and note that, in this position of the slide,
they have coincided, respectively, with plaintext letters _y_ and
_s_, then the distance _EW_ in the sliding alphabet must be exactly
equal to the distance _ys_ in the stationary one. It follows from
this that _ys_ and _ab_ are equal in the stationary alphabet. If we
begin again with the lineal interval _ys_, we find that this is equal
to _UZ_ of alphabet 4, and that _UZ_, found again in alphabet 7, is
equal to _vd_. Here, then, is another interval, _vd_, which is equal
to both ab and _ys_. And so we may continue, forming a chain made up
of these known equal intervals, _ab_, _ys_, _vd_, _qx_, etc., for the
plaintext alphabet, and _EW_, _UZ_, _BP_, _GC_, for the cipher
alphabet. Sometimes we return to _ab_ (_EW_) without having included
all 26 letters, and in that case (unless the number of letters
included is a divisor of 26), it becomes necessary to abandon _ab_,
and try starting with some other interval, as _ac_.


                                  Figure 148

              Some EXERCISES in the RECONSTRUCTION OF ALPHABETS

  Plaintext .......  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z

  Exercise 1:        Q * Z A X B O C N * E R F P V G * Y M U I * W * T L

  Exercise 2:        U V D W S X K Y H Z C F R J Q L I N G P T O M E A B

  Exercise 3:        H J G K F P E Q O R S T D M B U V W X A Y Z C L I N

  Exercise 4:  (1)   V N U X J Y Z D Q E M P O W C K R I A T L S B F G H
               (2)   H S G J R K L N F P Q B U I V A W C X Y T Z D E M O

  Exercise 5:  (1)   G X Y Z M H A F T R L K E V Q U O J W I P N S B C D
               (2)   E * G J I K * L B * * U T C V W * Q D X S * * * * *

  The keywords, all selected by Mr. A. F. SEMPER, do not contain any
  repeated letters.  The TYPES of slide, respectively, are:  I, III, III,
  IV, and III.  In the 5th exercise, the completely recovered alphabet
  is a "number 14."  (See also practice-cryptogram No. 46).


Here, as in the case of the _Type III_ slide, we sometimes obtain two
13-letter chains; but in the fortunate case of having recovered in
full both an odd-numbered and an even-numbered cipher alphabet, we
end the chain with every letter represented twice, both in the
stationary alphabet and in the sliding one. Pairs of letters
(representing horizontal intervals) can then be rearranged as in the
other case, the second letter of one becoming the first letter of the
next (in both series), and the dropping out of duplicated letters
gives us an equivalent slide. In the figure, starting with _ab_
(_EW_), we find a plaintext alphabet _a b i o v d u_. . . . . and a
cipher alphabet _E W O I B P X_. . . . . . This, as mentioned, is one
of eleven possible equivalent slides, of which one is the original.
Here, the original can be found by taking letters at interval 21. In
the figure, letters were taken at interval 5, a result of observing
the sequence _W X Y Z_ standing at that interval in the lower
alphabet, and the slide comes out in reverse order. This is still an
equivalent slide, and the decryptor may or may not care to decide
which alphabet runs backward.

Since the reconstruction of these mixed-alphabet slides is probably
the most fascinating subject in the whole field of cryptanalysis,
several problems are being appended in Fig. 148. In all of these,
Semper has selected key-words or phrases to contain no repeated
letters. With reference to the practice cryptograms, only one of
those submitted was thought to have enough alphabet-length for purely
analytical attack. The others, even with their probable words or
partial translations, will still require some work. The periods of
these examples are said to be, respectively, 6, 7, 8, 3, and (?).


135.  By NEMO.   (Type II.  Partial solution: WHEN JACK BOOMER,GREEN RIVER,WYO,B..)

T E R P J   Y D B N Q   S A I M B   X B L Y M   D O B I T   Z P T I H   K O K A G
M Y Q R X   T D W U U   X B O B Q   Y D B W Z   S V Z G C   U P R Z S   W V O D M
T Q Z C A   T S M Y Q   F D B H Z   Q U T I H   F S V S Y   N F U L Z   G L B G D
M T R M U   C N A J M   I Y N Q O   F B D P Q   L G X U Y   W U I P C   A Y N J N
X S B K W   I J G R L   G I B.

136.  By NEMO. (Type III. Partial solution: ALOIS STEPHEN,YOUNG VIENNESE CHARGED W..)

H G K S T   I L O Y D   B O L E G   A Z N G P   D U W P B   D R V Z Q   Y Z X F L
Q S B H S   L T U Q P   S Z G X V   A Y T G B   C B X K H   U R I E D   M D X B T
O E P S A   R I N K X   K J B I T   P Y I X R   I U Z Y O   M I M H P   H B E J D
N E B S E   F L B F D   B H F J B   F N L G P   L J M I B   O G T A W   D U E Q E
Z T Y U S   I.

137.  By THE SQUIRE.  (Type III.  Probable words:  AMERICAN CONSTITUTION.  GLADSTONE).

H T F M R   S R T Y E   O V P D S   Z L A X B   A C N T N   A K X R C   S Z K G O
Q U O F A   Z R E T D   S V I W K   W T E L K   F R P R B   I H I N A   S W R R S
B O H T F   L A D D L   U B U F M   Q O J A G   I L I D W   T Z I M M   R H L L V
K W U J S.

138.  By ALII KIONA.  (Is this a diplomatic telegram?)

L L D R K   Y C R F A   S E V S U   K T D U L   X V K E V   C A B L Y   U P Y M R
K B E X U   B T E L W   P J F P T   I I U Q Q   K T F C T   P S K Q L   W N D A P
B F A E S   N M P R K   A P T T S   H F K B Z   R M G P P   Y V M S A   I F N P Z
A L T S U   S A U D N   L X A A Z   Y P U C H   K N P Y V   M S I A X   K K D B E
T P S A T   P K P S Y   V T A Y E   A P B T E   L W P J F   P T A X N.

139.  By PICCOLA.  (This is a straight-alphabet cipher.  Won't tell which one!)

A N D N Y   L M Y X N   K D L R P   G C X G Q   N A A R Z   L D E P L   G I A W Q
N E I O G   A G P Q G   Z V D E I   E Z R H A   Y P L B P   N A G E L   N V A G T
D H O K H   V G T I N   D O L S F   C P L R T.




CHAPTER XIX
Polyalphabetical Encipherment Applied by Groups

Any one of the multiple-alphabet ciphers may change keys at each new
group instead of with each consecutive letter. As a rule, this kind
of encipherment is never found except in connection with very simple
ciphers, and the intact plaintext groups, each one standing on its
own key-line, are readily discovered by the decryptor who takes the
precaution of cutting out a segment from his cryptogram and “running
down the alphabet,” first treating the original letters and then, if
necessary, their complements. Porta encipherment, in any form, is
rare, but its cryptograms can be subjected to the same process,
provided the letters of the tested segment are first enciphered in
the _AB_-alphabet, and the subsequent extensions properly carried out.


                                      Figure 149

                                The "PHILLIPS" Cipher

  1   C U L P E*      2   R Z Y X W      2   R Z Y X W      2   R Z Y X W
  2   R Z Y X W       1   C U L P E*     3   V T S Q O      3   V T S Q O
  3   V T S Q O       3   V T S Q O      1   C U L P E*     4   N M K I H
  4   N M K I H       4   N M K I H      4   N M K I H      1   C U L P E*
  5   G F D B A       5   G F D B A      5   G F D B A      5   G F D B A

             (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)
  Plaintext:  T R Y M A.......    C D O N A.......   L D O N T.......   H A T M U..
  CIPHER:     K T Q D C.......    T X N F R.......   I X C F L.......   C R K L D..

  2   R Z Y X W       3   V T S Q O       3   V T S Q O       3   V T S Q O       
  3   V T S Q O       2   R Z Y X W**     4   N M K I H       4   N M K I H       
  4   N M K I H       4   N M K I H       2   R Z Y X W**     5   G F D B A       
  5   G F D B A       5   G F D B A       5   G F D B A       2   R Z Y X W**     
  1   C U L P E*      1   C U L P E*      1   C U L P E*      1   C U L P E*      

             (5)                 (6)                 (7)                 (8)
      .....   R P H Y P.......    R O P O S.......    I T I O N.......    C U R L Y.
      .....   T W G Q W.......    M R O R X.......    W K W N Z.......    T S U Q P.


With mixed alphabets of any kind, a number of cases may arise,
according to whether groups are of uniform length, or of varying
lengths, or, in fact, represent word-lengths; or, in the one case of
uniform groups, according to the length of these groups, or the
amount of material available, or as to how much is known in advance,
and so on. From among so many possibilities, suppose we select the
case of accumulated short messages, and, at the same time, take a
brief look at a cipher which, according to its description, was
actually intended for group-by-group application. This cipher, which
may be examined in Fig. 149, was described in an early issue of
_The Cryptogram_ as having been used for military purposes, and was
called the “Phillips” system. The text of the figure “Try Macdonald
on that Murphy proposition. Curly” includes eight five-letter groups,
thus requiring eight cipher alphabets. The key, as originally prepared,
is a mixed 25-letter alphabet written into a 5 x 5 square, of which
the five rows can be cut apart to form five horizontal strips. It may
also be set up with anagram blocks. This is alphabet 1 (or block 1),
and serves to encipher the first five-letter group. The method of
substitution will be explained in a moment. Alphabet 2 (block 2) is
derived from the first by moving line 1 so that it stands between
lines 2 and 3. Alphabets 3, 4, and 5 are derived by continuing to
move the original line 1 so that it stands, successively, between
lines 3 and 4, between lines 4 and 5, and at the bottom of the square.
Alphabets 6, 7, and 8 are derived by moving the original line 2
according to the same plan. For puzzle purposes, these movements may
continue as they apparently began. Line 2 may be given its one
remaining shift, which places it at the bottom of the square, and
lines 3, 4, and 5 may then be moved downward in the same way as the
first two; some puzzlers, in fact, will afterward continue by treating
columns. But according to the description (the only one the writer has
ever seen of this cipher), the eighth cipher alphabet is the last. For
the encipherment of the next eight groups, either the square is
restored to its original set-up and the same eight alphabets used
again, or the first key is abandoned altogether in favor of an
entirely new one.

Now, considering any one block, as No. 1, the method of substitution
is as follows: Each letter is to be replaced by the one standing
immediately to its right on the descending diagonal. If the given
letter happens to stand at the extreme right side of the square, it
is to be replaced by one standing at the extreme left and on the next
line below. If it happens to stand on the bottom row of the square,
it is to be replaced by one standing on the top row and in the next
column to the right. One letter, in fact, requires both of these
(mental) adjustments; the letter which occupies the lower right-hand
corner is to be replaced by the one occupying the upper left-hand
corner. If the foregoing is well understood, is is quite obvious that
our key-square is, to all intents and purposes, a rhombus formed with
five diagonals. One diagonal is complete, as _C Z S I A_ of block 1.
The other four break off at the right and are continued from the left,
as _L X O N F_ of block 1; or, if you prefer, break off at the bottom
and are continued from the top, as _N F L X O_ of block 1. It should
be obvious, also, that any one of these five diagonals can be
considered as beginning with any one of its five letters without in
the least changing the encipherment. Thus, each diagonal furnishes
what is called _cyclical encipherment_. But, as a matter of fact, the
entire square involves cyclical encipherment: The placing of line 1
at the bottom of the square, or of column 1 on the right side of the
square, or the transfer of several lines or columns, or of both, will
not have any influence whatever on substitutes; for this, it is
necessary to alter the 1-2-3-4-5 order of these rows or columns.
Alphabet 5, then, will be the same as alphabet 1; and if the plan of
the puzzlers be followed, this same alphabet continues to reappear
for the encipherment of each fourth group, blocks 1, 5, 9, 13, 17,
and so on, of a long cryptogram, eventually giving a great deal of
material in one cipher alphabet. Moreover, groups having a length of
five letters will carry some very visible simple substitution patterns.
Now suppose we look at Fig. 150.

These eight cryptograms have all come from one source. The general
frequency count has shown a missing letter, _J_, suggesting the use
of a square, and we have suspected the cipher as “Phillips.” With
cryptograms arranged one below another, as shown, the first five
columns are presumably enciphered with block 1 of that cipher, the
next five columns with block 2, and so on; thus, we presumably have
40 letters each belonging to alphabets 1, 2, and 3, and almost that
number belonging to alphabet 4, that is, enough material for frequency
counts which will show whether or not they have been taken on simple
substitution alphabets. While 40 letters of text are very few, we
could, eventually, solve any simple substitution cryptogram of that
length, or any mixed-alphabet periodic whose alphabets have furnished
40 letters each. In the present case, our first alphabet has furnished
eight known word-beginnings; we have one column known to contain only
initials, and followed by two others which are very likely to be the
hiding-place of vowels. This does not mean that we should have no
preliminary struggles, but in the end there are plenty of clues to
set us on the right road: The predominant letters of alphabet 1 are
_A_, _B_, _O_, _K_, _U_ (practically sure to contain _e_, _t_, and
one of the vowels _a_ or _o_). The column of initials repeats both
_A_ and _T_ (to be compared against a list _t s a_. . . .). The
second and third columns, combined, include _B_ and _O_, three times
each, with _O_ found in the initial column also (both could be vowels,
and _O_ probably represents _a_, though _i_ is also frequently found
as an initial). If _A_, by frequency and initial position, be tried
as _t,_ then the other repeated initial, _T_, can be tried as _s_.
This assumption brings out, in the fourth message, a pattern
_s_ - _t_ _t_ -, in which the second letter, _B_, would have to be a
vowel, either _e_ or _o_, since it has been doubled, with _e_
appearing more likely in the given pattern and also in that of the
sixth message, _s_ - - - _s_. The letter _O_, which under the
encipherment scheme could not possibly be its own substitute, can be
assumed, by frequency, as _a_, rather than _i_.


                                    Figure 150

  1.  A F S X O  S G Y F O  N P Y O A  K O A D G  F Z K S Z  O Y Z Y L  A W A C F.

  2.  H O U A L  H L E D H  D L Y G A  V D W A K.

  3.  K O N B K  A X U O N  H I Q P L  B A Z F F  S Y F D R  R L Y F.

  4.  T B A A M  A F Q E Z  U M A I X  G F S K B.

  5.  D K O A C  Y B Y E N  I M O W D  L E G A D  O H C Y U  U R G.

  6.  T B B X T  O M M D A  S I A A Y  D Z.

  7.  O U S U B  U L O I Y  G A K X M  A K W E L.

  8.  A K R U W  A N A L O  N N F M S  K A X E U.

                              General Frequency Count:

   A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z
  25  8  3 10  6 11  7  5  5  . 11 10  7  7 15  2  2  4  8  3 10  1  5  6 12  6

                        Frequency Count on Alphabet 1, Only:

                A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
                6 5 1 1 . 1 . 1 . . 4 1 1 1 5 . . 1 2 3 4 . 1 2 . .


These first correct substitutions are all shown on the left side of
Fig. 151, on the lines marked (a). Surely the next identification
would be the _m_ of _seems_, and probably, too, the _l_ of _settl_. . .
With the vowel _a_ already identified, the repeated _OU_ would be
tried as _an_, and the repeated _KO_ as _ha_, using the digram list.
These are the substitutions marked (b), and from this it is but a
step to the assumptions marked (c). On the right side of this figure,
we are proceeding into alphabet 2. A frequency count here has shown
that the leading letters of this alphabet are _A_, _O_, _Y_, two of
which, _A_ and _O_, were also leaders in alphabet 1. It is one
peculiarity of the “Phillips” cipher that a change in alphabets means
a change in only fifteen of the substitutes, the remaining ten
continuing to represent the same originals as in the preceding
alphabet. Concerning _A_, we can see, from the third and fourth
messages, that it has not continued to represent _t_; but _O_, in the
sixth message, has rather suggested the word _all_ and even the
expression _all right_, which would carry us on into the third
alphabet. From this point onward, then, we are in the same fortunate
position as the decryptor who intercepts his message partly in cipher
and partly in plaintext. With the context as a guide, we need not
worry as to what happens at the ninth group.


               Figure 151

    First Alphabet Second Alphabet

  1.    A F S X O     S G Y F O ...
    (a) t . . . a     . . . n a
    (b) t . . m a     . . o n a
    (c) t r y m a     . . o n a (Try ma...)

  2.    H O U A L     H L E D H ...
    (a) . a . t .     . . . . .
    (b) . a n t .     . s u r .
    (c) c a n t .     e s u r e (Can't be sure...)

  3.    K O N B K     A X U O N ...
    (a) . a . e .     i . . a .
    (b) h a . e h     i m . a t
    (c) h a v e h     i m . a t (Have him ...)

  4.    T B A A M     A F Q E Z ...
    (a) s e t t .     i . g . a
    (b) s e t t l     i n g u .
    (c) s e t t l     i n g u p (Settling up ...)

  5.    D K O A C     Y B Y E N ...
    (a) . . a t .     . . . . .
    (b) . h a t .     o y o u t
    (c) w h a t .     o y o u t (What do you t...)

  6.    T B B X T     O M M D A ...
    (a) s e e . s     a l l . i
    (b) s e e m s     a l l r i
    (c) s e e m s     a l l r i (Seems all ri...)

  7.    O U S U B     U L O I Y ...
    (a) a . . . e     . . a . .
    (b) a n . n e     . s a . o
    (c) a n y n e     w s a . o (Any news abo...)

  8.    A K R U W     A N A L O ...
    (a) t . . . .     i . i . a
    (b) t h . n .     i t i s a
    (c) t h i n k     i t i s a (Think it is a...)

          Frequency Count on Alphabet 2, Only:

  A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z
  5 1 . 2 3 2 1 2 1 . . 3 2 3 5 . 1 . 1 . 2 . . 1 4 1


Presumably, during all of this time, we have been recording
substitutes in a key-frame. We have recovered fifteen of these in
alphabet 1, and also a number in alphabet 2. Those recovered from
alphabet 1 are shown at the top of Fig. 152. _O_ is the substitute
for _a_, _A_ is the substitute for _t_, _T_ is the substitute for
_s_, and _S_ is the substitute for _y_. Thus, if the cipher is
“Phillips,” then, in the original key-square, the two letters _A O_
were consecutive on one of the diagonals, the two letters _T A_ were
consecutive, the two letters _S T_, and the two letters _Y S_, so
that the complete diagonal must have been _Y S T A O_, and even
though the letter _o_ was not used at all in alphabet 1, we know that
its substitute must have been _Y_, since these diagonals may be
considered to begin with any one of the five letters. By beginning
at _c_-_H_, and following out another such chain, we may find another
complete diagonal, _C H K W D_; and, in addition, we may find parts
of diagonals. All of these are shown at (b).


                               Figure 152

                An Alphabet No. 1 - Taken from a Key-Frame:

    Plaintext:    a b c d e f g h i . k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z
    SUBSTITUTES:  O . H . B . . K R . W M X U . . . F T A . N D . S .

       (a)
             A        T        S        Y           Y
               O        A        T        S           S
                                                        T
                                                          A
       (b)                                                  O
    *Y          C          E      I      L      *V
       S          H          B      R      M       N
         T          K                 F     *X       U
           A         *W
             O          D

       (c)                   (d)                         (e)

  N D .│S│          S . N D .   S I N D E       . N D . S   I N D E S
    U C│.│T         . T . U C   B T R U C       T . U C .   T R U C B
      .│H│L A       H L A . .   H L A F .       L A . . H   L A F . H
       │.│K M O     . K M O .   . K M O .       K M O . .   K M O . .
       │ │V W X Y   . V W X Y   . V W X Y       V W X Y .   V W X Y .


Whether or not we can go further than this, without consulting other
cipher alphabets, depends upon whether or not the original key-square
contained some of those alphabetical, or nearly alphabetical,
sequences which so often betray the poorly-mixed alphabet; usually,
these are most easily found toward the _X Y Z_ end of the normal
alphabet. In the given case (b), we are able to find the letters _V_,
_W_, _X_, and _Y_, each standing on a separate diagonal; thus, by
readjusting the beginning-points of their diagonals so as to place
these letters at the bottom, we are able to set together four of
these diagonals in the order shown at (c), leaving only the
part-diagonals _E B_ and _I R F_ still to be added. Their length will
show that _I R F_ belongs to the missing diagonal, but _E B_, by its
length, could belong to any one of three diagonals. Further
developments can be carried out with the rhomboid adjustment of (c),
or, if this is confusing, the conversion to a square can be made
immediately. The student may decide for himself which he prefers of
the two developments marked (d) and (e). Notice that this restoration
of the key-square can take place not only from a single alphabet, but
with only 15 substitutes known in that alphabet. But without the aid
of alphabetical sequences, we must, in the first place, have 20
substitutes, four for each diagonal, in order to recover the full
diagonals, after which, each one is entirely independent of the other
four, so that they cannot be adjusted and combined without consulting
one or more of the other alphabets. Here, the method varies a little,
according to just what we can recover, though a hasty glance at the
perfect case will serve to show the general path for all. To see this
as rapidly as possible, we will assume that we have recovered from
alphabet 1 the full five diagonals, and that, in alphabets 2, 3, and
4, we have discovered the substitutes for _e_, and also the originals
for which _E_ has been the substitute.

A careful consideration of the cipher itself will show that no letter
can have more than four different substitutes: the four letters in
the next column to its right which are not on the same line with
itself. Also, that no letter may act for more than four different
originals: the four letters in the next column to its left which are
not on the same line with itself. Any letter, in order to take all
four substitutes and act for all four originals in four successive
alphabets, must have started on the top line, which is the moving one.


                          Figure 153

   Five Complete Diagonals Recovered From Any Alphabet No.1

  Y           C           E           I           V
    S           H           B           R           N
      T           K           L           F           U
        A           W           M           P           G
          O           D           X           Z           Q

  \           ↓
  Y \ V  │         │    
    S\I N│  E      │                           D E S I N
      T\R│U C B    │                           U C B T R
        A│F G H L  │                           F G H L A
         │O\P Q K M│                           O P Q K M
         │   \Z   W│X                          X Y Z V W
         │     \   │D
          ↑


Now, considering Fig. 153: Our five recovered diagonals are imagined
to be those of a well-mixed square, so that we have no discoverable
sequences. It has been found that the letter _e_, in alphabets 1, 2,
3, and 4, has taken, successively, the substitutes _B_, _H_, _Q_, and
_Z_, and that the cipher-letter _E_ has served, successively, as the
substitute for _x_, _u_, _f_, and _o_. The four letters _B H Q Z_,
then, must all have stood in a single column _in exactly the order
named_; and the four letters _X U F O_ must have stood in another
column, two positions to the left of the first, but with a minor
difference in the order: some other letter (the one on the same line
as _E_) must have intervened between _X_ and _U_. The order in this
column, then, must have been _U F O X_. Our first step toward
combining the five diagonals is that of adjusting four of them so as
to set up the column _B H Q Z_. This automatically sets up four
letters of the other column _U F * X_ (_D_) — in the figure, the
_X D_ is present, but has not been adjusted to the _U F_ * — after
which, the fifth diagonal can be added to the others by placing the
_O_ of the column _U F O X_ (_D_). Now, since the letter _E_ has
taken, successively, all four of its substitutes and all four of its
originals, it must, in alphabet 1, have been standing on the top row.
Two parallel lines (if desired) can be ruled across the set-up to
show the top and bottom of the square, and two others (placed
anywhere, so long as they mark a width of five columns) may be ruled
to show the two sides. The outside letters, _Y_, _V_, and _D_, may
all be transferred to the opposite ends of their diagonals, after
which the rhomboid is easily adjusted to the form of a square.

It will be seen from what precedes that group-by-group encipherment
offers little, if anything, that is new, and no problems or theories
which the student could not figure out with what he has learned of
substitutions. Solving the actual cryptograms, of course, could
present some difficulties, according to the individual case.

Of the practice cryptograms to follow, No. 140 follows the plan of
the puzzlers, and should not prove very difficult in spite of its
brevity. No. 141 is also a “Phillips,” while No. 142 has been
enciphered with a mixed-alphabet slide applied to five-letter groups.


140.  By NEMO.  ("Phillips."  Probable word:  ASSOCIATION)

N D Q T F   Q Z C N G   B U Z H X   N L U K Y   F T E E W   N R G U R   M O X Q X
E Q Z L B   G X H W F   F N R P X   P X V D D   F I T G S   E W R T I   I T Z X E
R V W A R   I S P E Y   I G R Q C.

141.  By PICCOLA.  (This is the real McCoy - in 1938.  But times change).

(a)  K G E U H   C K T S X   P C K N C   A D F X Q   C B X T
(b)  O U T U I   U B F S B   Q A P H N   B Y Z X X   L R U G
(c)  O F U O S   K H Q T K   P W Q F E   T B W W X   P K B O K   G H
(d)  B L A M R   P G X B W   G C W K Q   Z I A Q C   U H Y R C
(e)  G U C O S   B B L P S   B Q D K P   G P K D S   R C T B L   I
(f)  X R O S U   I T T F G   Y P C M C   K F T F X   O S R B H   O A G M
(g)  B O I B V   B U K E E   B D K B C   O B Y W B   T B M U H   O O A B
(h)  Y C U Y U   T B I T F   H S A N P   H C W T.

142.  By PICCOLA.  (Direct examination - Snowball vs. Snowball).

(q)  H F X L F   M B L R N   I N J W P   Z Z G I S   B B O Z X   S F S H R
H T A T M   R O F V ?      (a)  S X F U R   R W X I Q   S S.
(q)  U F V H C   N T I T T   F O E J X   O G N S G   X U S O E   H I V L X
E A T ?    (a)  U R Q Q T   W E X U W   I T O S.
(q)  H C W R U   Q U I T T   F Y O Q I   U D R S G   X Z W H G   F E T P C
J E M K Q   F I N D O   E E Z B L ?    (a)  U R Q Q T   W.
(q)  U R S U F   U G J R E   D V T O V   E C Z X Z   U Z G X S   D S H C Q
K E X Z W   I O V I R   M H D W B   D Z R R M ?    (a)  U R Q T D   H T T H I
J S S.
(q)  X C Q H R   E M Z L T   T O P A V   H U L E B   O Y O G N   U F V X T
Z L E K S   W F A V N ?    (a)  X R L L Q   E W L T C   O S P W V   C Z L E B
D W Y I Z   F I S R D   T W C E Z   T T A S G   O L E.

143.  By PICCOLA.  (Can you guess what cipher? "Foregoing" refers to No. 141).

R N N G T   R I O O H   E I T T A   F N D E N   O G E L G   E Y F I R   D A I S E.




CHAPTER XX
Vigenère with Key-Progression

Before leaving the study of multiple-alphabet ciphers, we will
consider briefly the process which, in its simplest form, would be
that shown in Fig. 154. The initial key, in each of three examples,
is _A_, and a long key has been formed by causing the initial one to
progress in the normal alphabet according to an agreed index. In the
first example, the progression index is 1, in the second, it is 2,
and in the third, it is 25 (or minus 1). The resulting long key will
govern a period, which is 26 or 13, according to whether the
progression index is odd or even. This encipherment, logically, would
be applied with a cipher disk. The initial key, as _A_ of the
examples, would indicate the starting position of the revolving disk,
the first letter being enciphered with the disk in this initial
position, after which the disk is made to revolve, so many angles at
a time, without further reference to key-letters. For this kind of
cryptogram, the solution is purely mechanical. A series of alphabets
may be extended, with each cryptogram letter as a beginning, and the
message can be found following a diagonal path in the resulting
set-up.


                                 Figure 154

                          Forms of Key-Progression

  Keys:      A B C D E F G...      A C E G I K M...       A Z Y X W V U...
             S E N D...            S E N D...             S E N D...
             S F P G...            S G R J...             S D L A...

  This type of key-progression can be decrypted by "running down the
  alphabet," and watching the diagonals for plaintext.


A much commoner scheme, when using a cipher disk, is that of following
a series of irregular shifts in accordance with a numerical key. If,
for instance, the initial position has been established and the first
letter enciphered in that position, and if the numerical key is
3-5-2-1-6, the disk will now be revolved 3 positions for encipherment
of the second letter, 5 positions for encipherment of the third
letter, 2 positions for encipherment of the fourth letter, and so on,
so that the disk must move 17 positions during encipherment of five
letters. This can produce a very long period indeed, especially when
the collective shifts result in an odd number.


                                 Figure 155

  Progressing Key:       C U L P E P E R   D V M Q F Q F S   E W N R ...
  Plaintext:             T H E R E I S O   T H E R C A U S   E F O R ...
  Partial Encipherment:  V B P G . . . .   W C Q H . . . .   . . . I ...


Substantially the same encipherment as the foregoing can be had with
a slide and a key-word, as indicated in Fig. 155. The progression
index, in this figure, is 1. The preliminary key-word, CULPEPER,
enciphers the first eight letters, then moves forward in the alphabet
and becomes _D V M Q F Q F S_ for the encipherment of the next eight,
_E W N R G R G T_ for the encipherment of the third eight, and so on.
In its practical application, one column could be taken at a time.
Notice, however, in Fig. 156, that when a key-letter progresses in
the alphabet, the possible substitutes for any one letter will also
progress, and to exactly the same extent. If the encipherment is
Vigenère or Beaufort proper, this progression is in the same
alphabetical direction as that of key-letters, while the variant
encipherment causes the substitutes to progress in the contrary
direction. Probably, then, the most convenient method of application,
and the one least likely to result in errors, would be that of Fig.
157. The cryptogram is first enciphered as an ordinary periodic, and
the progression is added later, using group-by-group encipherment.
Thus, as we receive the cryptogram, our repeated _ther_ has been
enciphered once as _V B P G_, again as _W C Q H_, and possibly, later
on, as _A G U L_, and the only period we shall be able to find, using
the regular methods, will be 26 x 8, or, if the progression index is
an even number, 13 x 8. But notice, in the same figure, comparisons
(a) and (b).


                                  Figure 156

  Vigenère and Beaufort Progression                Variant Progression

  Progressing Key:   A B C D E.....        Progressing Key:   A B C D E.....
  Plaintext letter:  H H H H H.....        Plaintext Letter:  H H H H H.....

  Cipher letter (V)  H I J K L.....        Cipher letter:     H G F E D.....
                (B)  T U V W X.....


Vigenère, it will be remembered, has been compared to the mathematical
process of addition. If the key-digram _CU_ be added to the plaintext
digram _TH_, their sum is the cipher-digram _VB_. The alphabetical
distance from _C_ to _U_ is 18, the alphabetical distance _TH_ is 14,
and the alphabetical distance _VB_ is 6 or could be 26 plus 6, 52 plus
6, and so on. It is a fact that when we “add” the two digrams _CU_
and _TH_, we actually do add their separating intervals, 18 and 14,
since we obtain a sum 32 in that of the cipher digram _VB_. It is
also an easily verified fact that the same reasoning applies to the
subtractions of the two Beauforts. The student who cares to
investigate may make use of the tableau shown as Fig. 158; to find
quickly the distance from one letter to another, find the first of
these at the left, the second at the top, and the alphabetical
interval between the two is shown in the cell of intersection. If it
is desired to know the reverse interval, find the first letter at the
top and the second at the side. Now notice, carefully, that when any
digram progresses in the alphabet, as _CU_ would become _DV_, _EW_,
_FX_, and so on, in a series of periods, _it does not change its
alphabetical interval_; in all of these digrams, the distance apart
of the two component letters is still 18. Thus, while our period
vanishes, the alphabetical intervals which represent it are still
present in the cryptogram; we have only to find these intervals,
subject them to a Kasiski examination, and convert the cryptogram to
an ordinary Vigenère.


                                    Figure 157

  Initial Key-word:      C U L P E P E R   C U L P E P E R   C U L P E P E R
  Plaintext:             T H E R E I S O   T H E R C A U S   E F O R T H I N...
  PRIMARY Cryptogram:    V B P G I X W F   V B P G G P Y J   G Z Z G X W M E...

  Progression Key:       A                 B                 C
  FINAL Cryptogram:      V B P G I X W F   W C Q H H Q Z K   I B B I Z Y N G...

        (a)
           C U  (key)     plus    T H  (plaintext)  equals   V B  (cipher).
        (b)
           Interval 18    plus    interval 14       equals  (32 less 26) = 6


                                        Figure 158

                        Tableau for Finding ALPHABETICAL INTERVALS


      A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z

  A   0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25   A
  B  25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24   B
  C  24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23   C
  D  23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22   D
  E  22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21   E
  F  21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20   F
  G  20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19   G
  H  19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18   H
  I  18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17   I
  J  17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16   J
  K  16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15   K
  L  15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14   L
  M  14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13   M
  N  13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12   N
  O  12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11   O
  P  11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10   P
  Q  10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9   Q
  R   9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8   R
  S   8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6  7   S
  T   7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5  6   T
  U   6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4  5   U
  V   5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3  4   V
  W   4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2  3   W
  X   3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1  2   X
  Y   2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0  1   Y
  Z   1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  0   Z

      A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z


Fig. 159 shows the preparation of the cryptogram: The alphabetical
interval from _K_ to _O_ is 4, that from _O_ to _S_ is 4, that from
_S_ to _X_ is 5, and so on. If these numbers are placed directly
below the first letter, as shown, the computation of their _lineal_
intervals apart is less confusing than when they are placed between
the two. As to repetitions, each repeated single number may represent
a repeated digram, each repeated sequence of two numbers may represent
a repeated trigram, and so on. Only the longer of these possibilities
have been underscored.


                                      Figure 159

                  (5)                 (10)                (15)                (20)
   K   O   S   X   M   Y   M   M   Q   Y   T   K   N   G   Z   W   L   T   Z   L
   4   4   5  15  12  14   0   4   8  21  17   3  19  19  23  15   8   6  12  22

                  (25)                (30)                (35)                (40)
   H   C   G   F   A   P   J   Y   K   W   A   T   Z   P   Q   X   U   J   Z   P
  21   4  25  21  15  20  15  12  12   4  19   6  16   1   7  23  15  16  16   6 

                  (45)                (50)                (55)                (60)
   V   C   Z   Q   A   R   F   P   V   Y   U   Y   C   R   C   X   M   X   G   I
   7  23  17  10  17  14  10   6   3  22   4   4  15  11  21  15  11   9   2  21   

                  (65)                (70)                (75)                (80)
   D   U   X   Q   Y   M   T   E   V   V   S   C   X   J   L   J   D   A   E   Y
  17   3  19   8  14   7  11  17   0  23  10  21  12   2  24  20  23   4  20   4

                  (85)                (90)                (95)               (100)
   C   S   F   P   J   W   F   V   J   V   Q   V   E   G   A   N   G   K   B   B
  16  13  10  20  13   9  16  14  12  21   5   9   2  20  13  19   4  17   0  17   

                 (105)               (110)               (115)               (120)
   S   C   P   Z   B   H   G   I   D   Z   J   A   N   Z   I   Y   E   Z   P   T
  10  13  10   2   6  25   2  21  22  10  17  13  12   9  16   6  21  16   4   -


                                     Figure 160

  Repeated Intervals       Lineal Interval              Possible Factors         

  4-4        KOS-UYC        51 -  1 = 50      2        5          10
  15-12      XMY-JYK        27 -  4 = 23      
  21-17-3-19 YTKNG-IDUXQ    60 - 10 = 50      2        5          10
  23-15      ZWL-XUJ        36 - 15 = 21         3           7
  21-15      FAP-CXM        55 - 24 = 31      
  7-23       QXU-VCZ        41 - 35 =  6      2  3        6
  16-6       ZPV-IYE       115 - 39 = 76      2     4                         19
  17-10      ZQA-BSC       100 - 43 = 57         3                            19
  10-17      QAR-ZJA       110 - 44 = 66      2  3        6          11
  15-11      CRC-XMX        56 - 53 =  3         3
  9-2        XGI-VEG        92 - 58 = 34      2                            17
  2-21       GID-GID       107 - 59 = 48      2  3  4     6     8       12
  17-0       EVV-KBB        98 - 68 = 30      2  3     5  6       10
  13-10      SFP-CPZ       102 - 82 = 20      2     4  5          10
  20-13      PJW-GAN        94 - 84 = 10      2        5          10
  9-16       WFV-ZIY       114 - 86 = 28      2     4        7


Fig. 160 shows the application of a modified Kasiski examination.
Notice the prominence of small factors 2 and 3, caused, often, by
repeated alphabetical intervals in the key itself. In the given case,
the period 10 would probably be the choice, though period 5 is
correct; in practice, we should probably consider possible digrams as
well as longer sequences. Accepting period 10, we have still to learn
the progression index, and for this we must consider letters, all of
which are shown in the second column of the same figure. Taking the
longest repetition, most likely to be reliable, the two first letters
are _Y_ and _I_; their alphabetical distance apart is 10, and their
lineal distance apart in the cryptogram is 50. If the accepted period,
10, is correct, it has taken five periods to produce the alphabetical
shift of 10, therefore the shift per period (the progression index)
is 10 divided by 5; or 2. This, of course, has taken for granted that
the encipherment is either Vigenère or Beaufort. Considered as a
possible variant Beaufort, where the progression is backward, the
alphabetical interval from _Y_ to _I_ is 16, which is not divisible
by 5, the number of periods. But this progression might have covered
the entire alphabet and then included 16, or it might have covered
the alphabet twice, and so on, before including 16. We must make it
divisible by 5, adding 26, then another 26, and so on, until we
obtain a total progression of 120. This, divided by 5, gives the
progression index as “minus 24” — the same as a normal progression of
2. In Fig. 161, the cryptogram has been re-written into the accepted
period 10, and the figures in parentheses at the right of each group
will indicate the amount of alphabetical shift when the progression
index is 2. A constant progression of 2 per group would correspond to
the application of a Vigenère key _A C E G_. . . . . , so that the
Saint-Cyr slide will serve for quickly converting the cryptogram to
its periodic form, and this is shown in Fig. 162. The period, as
mentioned, is actually 5, though this makes no difference in the
final results.


            Figure 161                                   Figure 162

  K4 O4 S5 X15M12Y14M0 M4 Q8 Y21              (A)   K  O  S  X  M  Y  M  M  Q  Y

  T17K3 N19G19Z23W15L8 T6 Z12L22  (2)         (C)   R  I  L  E  X  U  J  R  X  J

  H21C4 G25F21A15P20J15Y12K12W4   (4)         (E)   D  Y  C  B  W  L  F  U  G  S

  A19T6 Z16P1 Q7 X23U15J16Z16P6   (6)         (G)   U  N  T  J  K  R  O  D  T  J

  V7 C23Z17Q10A17R14F10P6 V3 Y22  (8)         (I)   N  U  R  I  S  J  X  H  N  Q

  U4 Y4 C15R11C21X15M11X9 G2 I21 (10)         (K)   K  O  S  H  S  N  C  N  W  Y

  D17U3 X19Q8 Y14M7 T11E17V0 V23 (12)         (M)   R  I  L  E  M  A  H  S  J  J

  S10C21X12J2 L24J20D23A4 E20Y4  (14)         (O)   E  O  J  V  X  V  P  M  Q  K

  C16S13F10P20J13W9 F16V14J12V21 (16)         (Q)   M  C  P  Z  T  G  P  F  T  F

  Q5 V9 E2 G20A13N19G4 K17B0 B17 (18)         (S)   Y  D  M  O  I  V  O  S  J  J

  S10C13P10Z2 B6 H25G2 I21D22Z10 (20)         (U)   Y  I  V  F  H  N  M  O  J  F

  J17A13N12Z9 I16Y6 E21Z16P4 T-  (22)         (W)   N  E  R  D  M  C  I  D  T  X


                                Figure 163

                     MATHEMATICAL FORMULA - C. H. PRICE


                             X =   AD  x  P  
                                      LD
                P = Period                   AD = Alphabetical Distance
                X = Progression Index        LD = Lineal Distance


  As Applied to the Supposed Repeated Trigram  KOS-UYC, Positions 1, 51:

                             X =   10 P  =    P 
                                   50         5

                BUT:  P and X must be integers      • •  If P = 5, then X = 1
                (and  P must be a divisor of 50)     •   If P = 10, then X = 2
                (Periods of 25, 50, are unlikely)


For those who like mathematics, Fig. 163 shows a method used by one
of our collaborators for determining both the period and the
progression index directly from the cryptogram. Price also preferred
to find alphabetical intervals by writing the normal alphabet into a
block, five letters to the line, with _Z_ standing alone on the last
line; thus, except for watching _Z_ occasionally, the distance from
one letter to another could be counted by fives. It is understood, of
course, that we do not accept the evidence obtained from only one of
the supposed repeated sequences; too many of these will be accidental,
and many of those which are actually periodic have not represented
repeated digrams, but merely repeated intervals. Naturally, too, the
progression index need not be a small number; the disk encipherment,
mentioned in the beginning, showed a progression of 17 for each period
5. This disk encipherment, incidentally, has been dealt with in a most
interesting manner in Givierge’s _Cours de cryptographie_.

  * * *

We have seen, then, all of the essentials of polyalphabetical
encipherment. With the cipher alphabets known to the decryptor,
practically all of the multiple-alphabet ciphers will be solved by
suitable modifications of processes described for Vigenère. When
alphabets are not known, his problem, always, is that of collecting
as many as possible of the substitutes belonging to each alphabet,
so that he may determine both the order of the letters and the
relationship of alphabets to one another.


144.  By THE SQUIRE.

S O V F O   G S G U F   V I J R I   F M O U I   C F T T I   K Z Y Z Z   Z U I F Q
Q L O W U   V A F J F   I W W L N   C R G J F   E M V V N   N C D H W   T A J N W
A R D B.                yallyyayyayalyyaaallayaaaylalllaylyayyallyyayaylalllyyall.

145.  By NEMO.

Y Y I Z C   U O F Y V   H Q Y H T   B E B S X   P T S Y C   R M R X L   X E A G U
Y L P U Q   B U U Q N   Y U S O Q   M O O S P   U G I J I   I F F F A   L I R G G
F G E H H   N T E G Y   Z S M C O   F U D E M   X O G I K   K V B N K   W K P Q X
M G D L A   I F N H M   X T U M E   Z X Y Z G   N A P D W  C D M N C  T T H N J  F D.

146.  By PICCOLA.  (We wouldn't throw monkey-wrenches for anything!)

X E I T B   B B B V M   X R S J P   Y L K E N   Y K S Z K   F R W L G   S A Y E A
V I X I X   D U V D U   R J G E I   B A N Z F   H D C C Y   C O Y R V   A B K W B
R H F K K   F X S E J   Y T F N L   R N I V K   V K Q H I   Q H I J L   P G O U J
V F C F T   S H L I D   V D D M P.

147.  By DAN SURR.  (Might try this without bothering about its progression!)

E C G M H   T Y T A J   B T H N G   A W K L I   B E M N R   H T D G N   G P D A O
Q A X R P   Z P F H D   D X I E A   U B S Y C   I X C W V   R H P B O   I X Y P Y
D V W N R   N X O O K   K I H F O   X D S V L   V W W C L   I H Z H V   W R L H W
M M I E E   A H G Q Y   R S R L K   L W Z T J   A Y W F N   S S U C V   Z L P X P
S E E E Y   R T H D H   T Z N U P   U R M G K   Z N T Y E   Q D E Z E   N N H W M
I N R L P   S S W P Y   M C R U B   J Z Y C R   N L M A S   M E U C L   R M D Y R
N E S T O   B V J E U   D V L O T   S Q B J H   B N R L B   V D X J P   X N I G F
I C Q J Y   Q Z X Q G   K B L F Q   U B Q K N   E L S S L   Y G T L F   L T D Z Z
Y K E E R   H K L W L   I M R N J   S O O J P   Q C A U D   M E I B B   Q X A H C
V A J C M   G X B I C   D K V C L   G Q I B S   C F V F W   Q N A X I   D R Z S X
R B I W R   C Q R.

148.  By PICCOLA.  (When is a tramp not a tramp?)

E R N I C   D M R A S   T A A P H   T P I L T   Q V A A S   N E A E E   R O O L R.




CHAPTER XXI
Polygram Substitution — The Playfair Cipher

Polygram substitution contemplates the encipherment of several letters
collectively: Digrams are to be replaced with other digrams, or with
three-digit numbers; trigrams are to be replaced with other trigrams,
or with four-digit numbers; and so on, the substitute for an
individual letter being entirely dependent upon the combination in
which it happens to occur. Many devices have been contrived for
accomplishing this. For pair-encipherment, tableaux of the general
kind shown in Fig. 164 are fairly common.


                                     Figure 164

      A  M  E  R  I  C  N  B  D  F  G  H  J  K  L  O  P  Q  S  T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z

  E  AA BA CA DA EA FA GA HA IA JA KA LA MA NA OA PA QA RA SA TA UA VA WA XA YA ZA
  Q  AB BB CB DB EB FB GB HB IB JB KB LB MB NB OB PB QB RB SB TB UB VB WB XB YB ZB
  U  AC BC CC DC EC FC GC HC IC JC KC LC MC NC OC PC QC RC SC TC UC VC WC XC YC ZC
  A  AD BD CD DD ED FD GD HD ID JD KD LD MD ND OD PD QD RD SD TD UD VD WD XD YD ZD
  L  AE BE CE DE EE FE GE HE IE JE KE LE ME NE OE PE QE RE SE TE UE VE WE XE YE ZE
  I  AF BF CF DF EF FF GF HF IF JF KF LF MF NF OF PF QF RF SF TF UF VF WF XF YF ZF
  T  AG BG CG DG EG FG GG HG IG JG KG LG MG NG OG PG QG RG SG TG UG VG WG XG YG ZG
  Y  AH BH CH DH EH FH GH HH IH JH KH LH MH NH OH PH QH RH SH TH UH VH WH XH YH ZH
  B  AI BI CI DI EI FI GI HI II JI KI LI MI NI OI PI QI RI SI TI UI VI WI XI YI ZI
  C  AJ BJ CJ DJ EJ FJ GJ HJ IJ JJ KJ LJ MJ NJ OJ PJ QJ RJ SJ TJ UJ VJ WJ XJ YJ ZJ
  D  AK BK CK DK EK FK GK HK IK JK KK LK MK NK OK PK QK RK SK TK UK VK WK XK YK ZK
  F  AL BL CL DL EL FL GL HL IL JL KL LL ML NL OL PL QL RL SL TL UL VL WL XL YL ZL
  G  AM BM CM DM EM FM GM HM IM JM KM LM MM NM OM PM QM RM SM TM UM VM WM XM YM ZM
  H  AN BN CN DN EN FN GN HN IN JN KN LN MN NN ON PN QN RN SN TN UN VN WN XN YN ZN
  J  AO BO CO DO EO FO GO HO IO JO KO LO MO NO OO PO QO RO SO TO UO VO WO XO YO ZO
  K  AP BP CP DP EP FP GP HP IP JP KP LP MP NP OP PP QP RP SP TP UP VP WP XP YP ZP
  M  AQ BQ CQ DQ EQ FQ GQ HQ IQ JQ KQ LQ MQ NQ OQ PQ QQ RQ SQ TQ UQ VQ WQ XQ YQ ZQ
  N  AR BR CR DR ER FR GR HR IR JR KR LR MR NR OR PR QR RR SR TR UR VR WR XR YR ZR
  O  AS BS CS DS ES FS GS HS IS JS KS LS MS NS OS PS QS RS SS TS US VS WS XS YS ZS
  P  AT BT CT DT ET FT GT HT IT JT KT LT MT NT OT PT QT RT ST TT UT VT WT XT YT ZT
  R  AU BU CU DU EU FU GU HU IU JU KU LU MU NU OU PU QU RU SU TU UU VU WU XU YU ZU
  S  AV BV CV DV EV FV GV HV IV JV KV LV MV NV OV PV QV RV SV TV UV VV WV XV YV ZV
  V  AW BW CW DW EW FW GW HW IW JW KW LW MW NW OW PW QW RW SW TW UW VW WW XW YW ZW
  W  AX BX CX DX EX FX GX HX IX JX KX LX MX NX OX PX QX RX SX TX UX VX WX XX YX ZX
  X  AY BY CY DY EY FY GY HY IY JY KY LY MY NY OY PY QY RY SY TY UY VY WY XY YY ZY
  Z  AZ BZ CZ DZ EZ FZ GZ HZ IZ JZ KZ LZ MZ NZ OZ PZ QZ RZ SZ TZ UZ VZ WZ XZ YZ ZZ


The tableau proper includes a full list of the 676 possible two-letter
combinations, while two external alphabets will furnish another
possible 676 two-letter combinations. With the plaintext marked off
into pairs, the encipherment of a pair is usually accomplished by
finding its two letters in the two external alphabets, where they act
as co-ordinates, and replacing this pair with the one which is found
at the cell of intersection. Thus, using the tableau of the figure,
and the order row-column, the substitute for _th_ would be _LG_; or,
using the order column-row, _TN_. With a tableau like that of the
figure (notice the straight unshifted alphabets), it is also possible
to encipher by what is ordinarily considered the decipherment process,
finding the plaintext pair inside the tableau and replacing it with
the two co-ordinates. But many of these tableaux are filled in a
thoroughly haphazard manner, and when this is the case, only the
ordinary encipherment plan is really feasible; in fact, the decipherer
has trouble in finding his cryptogram pairs, and it is usually
necessary that a second tableau be prepared especially for
decipherment purposes. On the other hand, it is very easy to construct
a mixed tableau in such a way that all of its encipherment is
reciprocal, and in this case there is no need for a second tableau,
since encipherment and decipherment are the same process. In most
forms of tableau, one or both of the external alphabets may be made
to slide and for the most part external alphabets are readily
changeable. But the tableaux themselves will have to be of more or
less fixed nature. Those which are safest are least readily
reconstructed from memory, and even those most easily remembered are
not set up very rapidly.

Another common method for pair encipherment can be understood from
the following description: Picture a chart of 100 cells which is
divided sharply into four quarters; that is, having much the
appearance of a 100-cell Fleissner grille. Each of the four quarters
is a 5 x 5 square and contains a 25-letter alphabet. At least two of
these alphabets are mixed, usually with different keys. To encipher
a pair, find its two letters in two different squares, and substitute
two others which occupy certain relative positions in the other two
squares.


                 Figure 165

    The "SLIDEFAIR" Cipher -(H. F. GAINES)

  Key:          H  E  R  C  U  L  E  S 

  Plaintext:    SE ND DI AM ON DS TO AM
  CIPHER:.....  XZ ZR RU KC TI HO KX US

                ST ER DA MM ON DA YW EE
         .....  MZ NI JU KO TI PO SC MW

                KW IT HO UT FA IL
         .....  PR PM XY RW GZ AT

  Cryptogram taken off:
      X Z Z R R   U K C T I   H O K X U , etc.


The writer’s own contribution, accomplished with a slide, may be
examined in Fig. 165; the slide used in the example was the Saint-Cyr,
and details are self-explanatory, except for the method of enciphering
pairs, which was as follows: To encipher those of the _H_-column,
bring the _H_-alphabet into position on the slide; then, for each
pair, find its first letter in the upper alphabet and its second
letter in the lower one; imagine these to be standing at the two ends
of a diagonal, and substitute the two letters from the two ends of
the corresponding cross-diagonal, taking the upper one first. Where
the two plaintext letters happen to coincide (as would be the case
with a pair _EL_ using the _H_-alphabet of the Saint-Cyr slide) use
the two letters which have also coincided immediately to their right
(as _FM_ for _EL_ in the given case).

Occasionally, such a tableau as that of Fig. 164 is made to serve
(not very successfully) for trigram encipherment. A third external
alphabet is added beside one of the others, so that the two which are
parallel will make provision for the encipherment of a third letter
simultaneously with the encipherment of each pair. But for trigram
encipherment, another type of tableau is commoner: The tableau proper
is not a list of pairs, but an alphabet square such as could be
prepared for one of the mixed-alphabet slides of Chapter XVIII, and
is accompanied by four external alphabets, two on the left and two
across the top. The exact details of construction are not always the
same, and the methods prescribed for using such a tableau are
sometimes quite devious, but results are fairly uniform: We obtain
cryptograms in which enciphered pairs have alternated with enciphered
(sometimes _not_ enciphered!) single letters.


In all of the foregoing, no system has been mentioned which the
student will not be able to analyze for himself. At worst, he has a
case very much like simple substitution, except that he would require
a great deal more material, and would use a digram chart instead of a
frequency list. Otherwise, he usually finds that he has merely a
variation of pure periodic encipherment. There are, of course, more
effective methods. Trigrams, tetragrams, and other polygrams, found
in alphabet squares, can always be considered as geometrical figures,
and replaced with other series of letters in related geometrical
figures; and Lester S. Hill, in the American Mathematical Monthly,
has described an “algebraic” method which appears practical, provided
a machine is used. These methods, however, even granting that some
are practical and not too unwieldy for use, are entirely beyond our
present scope, and we will spend our few remaining pages on a cipher
of a less cumbersome nature and presenting far more points of interest.


                                   Figure 166

                              The PLAYFAIR Cipher

     KEY         Encipherment              Some Equivalent Keysquares

  C U L P E      (1)  bl = IB         L P E C U    N O Q S T    Y Z V W X
  R A B D F           ez = FE         B D F R A    V W X Y Z    P E C U L
  G H I K M      (2)  cl = UP         I K M G H    C U L P E    D F R A B
  N O Q S T           ce = UC         Q S T N O    R A B D F    K M G H I
  V W X Y Z      (3)  th = OM         X Y Z V W    G H I K M    S T N O Q
                      ht = MO

  Example:

  SE ND DI AM ON DS TO AM ST ER DA MX MO ND AY WE EK WI TH OU TF AI LX.
  TP SR BK FH QO KY NQ FH TN CF FB IZ HT SR DW ZU PM XH OM WA ZM BH BL.


  * * *

_The Playfair cipher_, which may be examined in Fig. 166, requires
no apparatus other than pencil and paper. Its key is the usual
5 x 5 square, based on a key-word, and filled in by any agreed plan
(preferably not by straight horizontals). For encipherment, the
plaintext is marked off into pairs, and these pairs are enciphered
according to three very simple rules:

1. If the two letters of the pair are found in the same column in
the key-square, replace each letter with the one directly beneath it;
and if one letter stands at the bottom of the column, use the one
standing at the top of the same column. With the key of the figure,
_ha_ becomes _OH_; _wa_ becomes _UH_.

2. If the two letters of the pair are found in the same row in the
key-square, replace each letter with the one immediately to its right;
and if one letter stands at the extreme right end of the row, use the
one standing at the extreme left end of the same row (_os_ becomes
_QT_; _st_ becomes _TN_).

3. If the two letters of the pair have a diagonal relationship in the
key-square (and these are usually in the majority), consider them to
be standing at the diagonally opposite corners of an imaginary small
rectangle, and substitute for each letter that letter of the other
diagonal which stands on the same row with itself (_bu_ becomes _AL_,
not _LA_). The decipherment rules, as usual, are the same rules in
reverse.

  * * *

Notice that this encipherment is _cyclical_. So long as the order
1-2-3-4-5 is maintained in both columns and rows, it makes no
difference whatever how many columns are transferred from one side
to the other, or how many rows are transferred from top to bottom.
This may be investigated in the three equivalent squares of the
figure. Notice, too, that our three rules do not make any provision
for the case in which the two letters of a pair are the same. If,
in marking off the plaintext into pairs, we encounter a pair which
is a double, it becomes necessary to dispose of this, usually by
inserting a null which will throw the second letter into the next
pair. Occasionally we find a sequence such as LESS SEVEN, in which
it is necessary to do this twice in succession: _LE Sx  Sx SE VE
Nx_. An unpaired final letter also requires a null (unless left
unenciphered), and when five-letter groups are to be used, it often
becomes necessary to complete a final group by adding nulls.

The foregoing description and rules are those of the original
Playfair cipher. Many encipherers, however, will vary the rules,
especially the one concerning doubles; perhaps one letter will be
omitted or replaced with a null; sometimes one double is replaced
with another; occasionally an encipherer will separate every doubled
letter in the message whether or not this is necessary. We meet,
too, with variant forms. A 24-letter alphabet will be used in a
4 x 6 rectangle, or a 27-letter alphabet (with character &) will
be used in a 3 x 9 rectangle. One variation, attributed to W. W.
Rouse-Ball, uses the standard key-square with the standard rule 3,
but varies the two rules for lineal encipherment. Rule 1: If the two
letters of the pair stand in a column, use the two letters immediately
to their right. Rule 2: If they stand in a row, use the two letters
immediately beneath them. In all of these cases, presuming the method
to be known, the degree of difficulty would be the same as if the
standard system had been used; otherwise, it is only necessary to
keep in mind the fact that variations occasionally occur. We will
give our attention, then, to the standard encipherment. But before
entering into the subject of decryptment, let us look carefully at
the system itself.

Primarily, we have a _fixed_ substitution. No plaintext pair ever has
more than one substitute pair; and no substitute pair ever changes
its original. We might say that the Playfair is, in effect, a “simple
substitution” based on an “alphabet” of 600 pairs; and, just as in
simple substitution proper, the Playfair cryptograms will very often
contain long repeated sequences which represent whole words. Again,
the reversal of a plaintext pair means the reversal of its substitute
pair, and vice versa, so that the discovery of any one equation (as
_th_ = _OM_) always means the discovery of another (as _ht_ = _MO_);
and if, in addition, the encipherment was a rectangular one (rule 3),
we obtain also the two reciprocal equations (as _om_ = _TH_, and _mo_
= _HT_). The two lineal encipherments, however (rules 1 and 2), are
not reciprocal. But notice particularly that, in spite of the polygram
theory, each letter has its individual substitutes. No letter in the
key-square may have more than five of these; the four which are
standing on its own line, and the one which stands directly beneath
it. It may be learned, too, by writing out the 24 (or 48) possible
pairs for any one given letter, that the letter standing immediately
to its right in the key-square is twice as likely as any one of the
other four to act as its substitute; and, further than this, that any
letter which is paired with it will be limited to eight possible
substitutes, all of which must be found either in the column or on
the row of the letter itself. To clarify this important point, let us
assume that the letter in question is _E_, and that the key-square is
that of Fig. 166. The letter _E_ may have only the substitutes _C_,
_U_, _L_, _P_, and _F_, with _C_ twice as likely to be used as any
one of the other four. Any letter which is paired with _E_ must take
one of the following substitutes: _U L P E F M T Z_.

Naturally, then, those letters which, in the key-square, are standing
on the same row or in the same column with the normally frequent
letters will have high frequencies in the cryptograms; in fact, the
two or three which predominate in a given cryptogram will practically
always be letters which, in the key-square, were standing in the same
row or column with _E_ or _T_ (in English). Moreover, if any letter
has been identified once as the substitute for _E_, there is a most
excellent chance that it can be identified again as the substitute
for _E_. Say, for instance, that _CF_ has been identified, or assumed,
as the substitute for _er_. This means that _C_ is individually the
substitute for _e_, and when another pair _CT_ is found to be of some
frequency, it can be tried as the substitute for _en_, _es_, _et_,
and so on. Single-letter frequencies, then, will play an important
part in the decryptment of the Playfair. But the process will rest
fundamentally upon the frequencies of digrams, and will follow, in
general, three steps repeated over and over in the same rotation:

1. Certain pairs are identified, or assumed, as the substitutes for
certain digrams.

2. These pairs and their supposed originals are set together in such
a way as to start the reconstruction of the key-square.

3. Substitutions are made on the cryptogram and further pairs are
identified.

When probable words exist, the work of solution becomes more or less
mechanical, as we shall see. At worst, we may begin at the beginning
of the cryptogram and work straight through until we find the word.
But very often, a really probable word is repeated, and even repeated
more than once. In the latter case, we are sure to find the long
repeated sequence in the cryptogram; while a word repeated only once
may have been divided into two different sets of pairs, as:
_ex_-_ec_-_ut_-_io_-_n_ and _e_-_xe_-_cu_-_ti_-_on_. But notice, here,
what the two encipherments would be, using our key-square of the
figure: _LZ CU EO HQ x_ and _x ZL UL QM QO_. These two sequences have
five letters in common, _L Z U O Q_, and, in addition, when considered
together, show the letters _E C U O_ of the word “execution.” This
does not invariably happen, but is far from uncommon. Nor is the word
“execution” the only one which produces reversal (_ex_ in one sequence,
_xe_ in the other). Then, too, there are many words like “commission”
which, regardless of the point at which the division begins, will
always end in the same set of pairs: _mi_-_s?_-_si_-_on_.

Granting an absence of probable words, the difficulties of solution
are almost entirely dependent upon the amount of material available.
A pair-count will be made in the usual chart-form (but only on the
divided pairs, and not “straddling” from one pair to another), and
pairs will be identified by frequency, by the frequency with which
they are found reversed, by the possibility of their letter-combinations
in a key-square, and so on. We will not attempt, here, to go into a
detailed demonstration, since every case is individual in its details,
and success, in all of them, is dependent largely upon the decryptor’s
own persistence. But in order to see sketchily what some of the
routine might be, we will make use of the very short example shown
in Fig. 167.

In the usual case, there has been a preliminary frequency count on
single letters in order to find out what the cipher is. The appearance
of this frequency count has more or less negatived the possibility of
simple substitution, and the next step has been a Kasiski tabulation
in the hope of finding a period. This tabulation, in any pair-system,
will bring out a predominant factor 2, and, since many of the supposed
digram systems actually do produce periods, the two supposed alphabets
would have been examined for that possibility. But pair-systems, as a
rule, will leave a wide-open trail: Repeated sequences, in the
majority of cases, will include an _even_ number of letters (that is,
an exact number of pairs), and will begin largely at the _odd_ serial
positions (that is, at the beginnings of pairs). The Playfair shows
this a little less distinctly than some of the others, because of the
fact that substitutes for single letters are so limited in number.

It is sometimes said of the Playfair that it can be distinguished
from other ciphers by (1) the fact that cryptograms contain an even
number of letters, (2) the fact that only 25 letters are represented
in its general frequency count, (3) the fact that when the cryptogram
is marked into pairs, no pair will be a doubled letter, and (4) the
presence of long repeated sequences at irregular intervals. As
conclusive evidence, these are debatable points, but all are good
supporting evidence, provided a proper confession can be extracted
from the pair-chart: (5) When the cryptogram has been marked off into
pairs, and the pairs counted, the result should bear much resemblance
to a count made on the same number of normal digrams. Even on an
extremely long cryptogram, over half of the cells will be blank,
since a normal text never uses more than about 300 of the possible
676 combinations; there will be a certain group of predominant pairs
followed by a group of moderate frequencies; and, with any appreciable
length, there will be a generous sprinkling of reversals. In preparing
the cryptogram, a great deal of convenience may be had by placing
frequency figures beside their digrams, by marking long repeated
sequences, noticeable reversals, and so on; and many persons like to
list the most prominent pairs and the most prominent reversals.


                                   Figure 167

  HR5 KY3 LD  ZX  NQ2 EO  ND  EC  TC  TI2 AD  CT  AK  RH  LB2 GT  SN  AN

  UN2 ON  DR  HX  PE  BN  ZC  DT  KV  EQ2 HD  AO  HR5 DU  RP  TQ  OB  DE2
 
  QD2 HR5 KY3 YA2 HZ  HB  BU  KZ  EQ2 XG  TI2 BI  KY3 RI  CQ  HR5 CE  CO 

  SX  RM  BC  TH  CG  QD2 RK  NQ2 IT  DC  WT  FV2 UB2 YA2 GU  HE  CZ  NU2

  LB2 IQ2 YK  FV2 UB2 IQ2 WD  QB  UN2 KM  DE2 TD  KA  HR5 NU2 OU


   Frequency Count - Rearranged:

    D  H  B  C  N  Q  R  T  K  U  E     A  I  O  Y  Z     G X L V F M P S W J
   14 12 11 11 11 11 11 11 10 10  9     7  7  6  6  5     4 4 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 -


       List of REVERSALS                         "Chart of Probable Position"

  HR 5 - RH 1        EC - CE                        E T/ D H  B C N Q R  K U
  KY 3 - YK 1        TC - CT                        D H
  UN 2 - NU 2        AK - KA                     B C N Q R
  UB 2 - BU 1        ZC - CZ                        K U
  TI 2 - IT 1        DT - TD


The Playfair has also a rather characteristic frequency count. Notice,
in the figure, where the general count has been rearranged in the
order of decreasing frequencies, that the gradation from high to low
is somewhat less even than in a periodic; frequency 8, for instance,
is skipped altogether, and we have a sort of modified high-frequency
group. Sometimes we find from one to three letters of great prominence
before the downward gradation begins.

Concerning the “chart of probable position,” most solvers prefer
simply to keep this in mind, while others will actually set it down
and make it the basis of their solution. With 176 letters of text,
the average frequency of letters is about 7 (176 divided by 25). Any
letter whose frequency is above that average is very likely to have
been standing on the same row or in the same column of the key-square
as _E_ or _T_, and the two or three which lead the list are
practically sure to have been substitutes for one of these two
letters.

With cryptograms of the present length, or even with those of 400 to
600 letters, it is very uncertain as to whether or not the leading
pair will represent _th_, or the leading reversal _er_-_re_. Here, in
fact, we have no reversal of a definitely frequent character, and our
one prominent pair, _HR_, might just as well represent _st_, _at_,
_it_, _on_, _re_, _se_, or any other normally frequent digram capable
of being used at the beginning of a sentence. Presuming, however, that
it might represent _th_, we know that this digram is followed almost
altogether by vowels, and is followed with remarkable frequency by
_e_ and _a_; we know also that letters have individual substitutes.
Thus, we might begin solution by listing (or noting) those pairs
which, in the cryptogram, have followed the supposed _th_: _KY_,
_DU_, _KY_, _CE_, _NU_, assuming that their first letters, _K_, _D_,
_C_, _N_, have probably represented vowels, and that, of these, _D_,
_C_, and _N_, which rank high in the list of single-letter
frequencies, are very likely to have represented _e_. We may attempt
to identify these five pairs by working down the list of normal
digrams, taking only those of _v_-_c_ formation. If, in addition, it
is assumed that the key-square has been filled by straight
horizontals, certain assumptions can be made through possible
alphabetical sequence; for instance, the _U_ of _DU_ and _NU_ may
have stood on the same line with _R_ _S_ _T_ (_U_). There is a
further field for suggestions to be found in _patterns_, such as
_TI BI_, in which the two _I_’s could represent the same letter.
And where the square is filled by straight horizontals, it is
often possible to identify such a sequence as _HZ_ _HB_ as a “split
double,” since the null used in these cases is often _X_, and _Z_
may well represent _X_ by alphabetical position, It is even possible
to guess here a doubled _L_, since _H_ and _L_ are not far apart in
the alphabet. (It may be, of course, that the two _H_’s represent two
different letters.) The foregoing, then, has indicated the general
path. If the student desires to follow out a detailed demonstration
made on a cryptogram of only moderate length, a most excellent
exposition can be found in the appendix to the Macbeth translation of
Langie’s “Cryptography” (Dutton). It was written by Lt. Commander
W. W. Smith of the U. S. Navy, and generally speaking, attacks the
identifications of pairs as follows:

Having placed frequency figures beside their digrams, find those
points at which two pairs of high frequency are consecutive (not
necessarily a repeated sequence), and attempt to identify these
tetragrams as frequent tetragrams of the language: _ther_, _ered_,
_ened_, _tion_, _atio_, _ment_, _beca_, and so on. We have one here,
provided a frequency of 3 can be considered important: _HR_ _KY_.
Since this happens also to be repeated, it probably represents a word,
as _that_, _this_, _they_.

Another good demonstration, provided the student has access to it in
his public library, is found in Colonel Parker Hitt’s “Manual for the
Solution of Military Ciphers.” This manual is an elementary work
intended for the preliminary instruction of soldiers, and the attack
is made on the assumption of a key-square filled by straight
horizontals. With a square of the kind we are using, most of the
vowels and high-frequency letters will be standing on the upper two
rows, and letters on the first two or three rows will have a much
higher frequency than those of the last two or three. In fact, it can
often be detected that the letters _V W X Y Z_ were standing on the
bottom row as an intact alphabetical sequence, for the simple reason
that they have no frequency in the cryptogram.

Colonel Hitt’s demonstration begins with the usual pair-count, made
on a chart. He selects from this chart the (approximately) ten letters
having the _widest variety of contact_, including, if necessary, the
vowel or so which would have to be present in a key-word; and these
letters are assumed to have stood on the upper rows of the key-square.
The remaining (approximately) fifteen letters are then set up in
their alphabetical sequence and are assumed to have stood on the
lower rows in about that order. They are not, of course, known to be
correctly placed; the set-up merely gives a concrete idea as to where
letters ought to have stood. Then, following the military case of
abundant material, it is assumed that the leading pair will represent
_th_ (sure to be followed often by _e_), or, if _th_ is not the
leader, then _he_ (sure to be preceded often by _t_). With a few
obvious identifications made in the usual way, letters begin to
arrange themselves on the upper rows, and a gradual adjustment takes
place which corrects the few wrong assumptions of the lower rows, so
that the key-square is restored far in advance of solution. When a
short key-word has been used, it is not impossible, by following
Colonel Hitt’s suggestions, to pick out all of the key-letters, guess
the word, and decipher with the key-square. Other demonstrations,
based, respectively, on French and Italian language characteristics,
can be found in General Givierge’s _Cours de cryptographie_ and in
General Sacco’s _Manuale di crittografia_. (In the French work, the
cipher is referred to simply as “orthogonal and diagonal substitution.”)

  * * *

It will be seen from the foregoing that the initial difficulty lies
in the correct identification of the first few pairs, and this, in a
short cryptogram, is no small difficulty. By whatever means it is
found possible to make these first tentative identifications, the
operation which is to admit or disprove their correctness is step
No. 2, in which we set them up as equations and then attempt to
replace them into their connected relationships in the key-square. If
this cannot be done, they cannot be correct; and, on the other hand,
it would be an extremely rare case indeed in which we could combine
as many as five or six such equations into one framework and then
find them incorrectly matched. To understand “equations,” suppose we
look at Fig. 168.


                                Figure 168

                         POSSIBLE RELATIONSHIPS

  (a)  A 3-letter Equation          (b)  A 4-letter Equation

    Vertical   Horizontal         Vertical   Horizontal   Rectangular

                                     I
       T                             K                       I . K
       H         T H R               .        I K . S Y      .   .
       R                             S                       Y . S
                                     Y

  (c)  Impossible Equations:        (d)  Possible Equations:

       co nd em na ti on               -c on de mn at io n-
       EO ND EC TC TI AD               EO ND EC TC TI AD CT


Assuming that the beginning pairs of our cryptogram, _HR KY_,
represent the word _this_, we have two equations, _HR_ = _th_, and
_KY_ = _is_. The first of these has only three different letters,
since _H_ is common to both members, while the second has four
different letters. With the first case (a), one of the lineal
encipherments must have been used, and the common letter, _H_, must
have stood between the other two, with its plaintext partner coming
first and its cryptogram partner coming last. We do not know whether
these three letters stood in a column or in a row, but we do know
that they were consecutive. This relationship may be expressed simply
as _T H R_, even though, in the actual square, the letters may have
been partly at the end of the row (or column) and partly at the
beginning: _H R * * T_ or _R * * T H_. Encipherment, remember, is
cyclical, and we may come out with any one of numerous “equivalent
squares.” With the second equation (b), the positions of letters are
not so definite. In either of the lineal encipherments, _IK_ must be
in direct sequence and _SY_ must be in direct sequence; either
sequence may have come first, and we do not know the exact location
of the fifth letter. Concerning their possible rectangular
encipherment, all we know is that there must have been a parallel
relationship; their distance apart, laterally or vertically, might
have been anything permitted by the key-square. As to the rest of the
figure, suppose that we have reason to suspect the presence in this
cryptogram of the word “condemnation.” The equations of (c) are
totally impossible, since, in Playfair, no letter may be its own
substitute. Those of (d) are not only possible, but probable, since
we find many letters from the word itself.


                                Figure 169

     Equations of (d),(Fig.168)            Possible Combinations
 
  1   2       3   4                   5    6        7        8

  O           D                       O
  N   O N D   E   D E C               N    O N D    O
  D           C                       D        E    N       O N D E C
                                      E        C    D E C
                                      C

  9    10           11                      12

  M
  T                 M . T                   O N D E C
  .  M T . N C      .   .                     .     .
  N                 C . N                     T     M
  C

     13     14                          15             16

      A                                 O N D E C      O N D E C
      T     A T I                         .     .        .     .
      I                                   A            A T I   M
                                          T     M
                                          I


To learn whether or not the word “condemnation” does (or could) occur
here, we proceed as in Fig. 169. The first of the five equations may
have had either one of the relationships marked 1 and 2, and the
second may have had either of the relationships marked 3 and 4. These
two equations have a letter _D_ in common, and it must not be
impossible to form a combination which will represent both. This, as
it happens, can be done in four different ways, marked 5, 6, 7, and 8,
and we do not know which of the four is most likely. The third
equation, which has four different letters, may have had any one of
relationships 9, 10, and 11. These, fortunately, show two letters,
_N_ and _C_, which are also present in combinations 5, 6, 7, and 8,
and with two common letters, there will not be so many possible
adjustments as when we had only one. Nos. 9 and 10, for instance,
cannot possibly combine with any one of combinations 5, 6, 7, and 8;
both of these have demanded that the letters _NC_ be in direct
sequence, where the first four combinations will not permit this. We
may begin, then, by discarding Nos. 9 and 10. But No. 11, which we
have retained, demands of _C_ and _N_ only that they be on the same
row. This is not permitted by any one of combinations 5, 6, or 7, and
these also may be discarded. But No. 8 shows them on the same row;
thus Nos. 8 and 11 may be further combined, and we have the
combination marked 12. The fourth equation, another lineal one, may
have had either of the relationships marked 13 and 14, and both of
these will combine easily with the combination marked 12, so that
again we have more than one possibility, as indicated under numbers
15 and 16. As to which of these is correct, the fifth equation,
_io_ = _AD_, is impossible to one, and has automatically been set up
in the other.

  * * *

We are safe, now, in making substitutions on the cryptogram. This
means not only the five pairs originally identified, together with
their reversals and possible reciprocals, but all others which can be
derived from combination 16, such as _om_ = _CA_, or _dm_ = _CI_, or
_en_ = _DC_, together with their reversals and possible reciprocals.
Then, too, there will be many partial equations, such as those
indicated in Fig. 170, where one letter of a pair can be identified.
Usually time is saved by taking cryptogram pairs just as they come
and filling in as many letters as possible; in this way, patterns are
sometimes brought out, and thus we come back to step 1: the
identification of more pairs. With the key-square beginning to shape
up, the “chart of probable position” may be used to good advantage.
For instance, what about the letters _H_ and _B_ which were very high
in the frequency list?


           Figure 170

  O * * E    N * E    DE    EC
  .          .        .      .
  A          T        I      M



Once a beginning is made, the cipher is broken, though just how
rapidly we may proceed with the solution depends chiefly upon the
manner in which the square has been filled. The presence of
alphabetical sequences (either horizontal or vertical) will often
enable us to complete the key-square independently of the cryptogram;
but the badly mixed square must usually be built up to the very end,
and we must sometimes be satisfied with one of the “equivalents” in
place of the square originally used. If the student cares to make a
fresh beginning of his own, this same cryptogram contains the word
RECONSTRUCT.

  * * *

             Figure 171

  S E N D D   D S T O A   R D A M M
  I A M O N   M X S T E   O N D A Y


The Playfair has been, in its day, a very effective cipher, and is
still good for many purposes. It can be rendered much safer if
subjected to the process called _seriation_. This process may be
examined in Fig. 171. Here, the text is “Send diamonds to Amsterdam
Monday,” and the agreed _seriation index_ is 5. The text is written
in pairs of five-letter lines, so that each ten-letter segment forms
five _vertical pairs_, _SI_, _EA_, _NM_, etc., and these are the
pairs which undergo the digram encipherment (notice the treatment of
the doubled _S_ in the second group). If the key-square is that of
Fig. 166, the first ten-letter segment is enciphered _QK_, _UF_,
_TG_, _SA_, _RS_, and the cryptogram may be taken off in that order,
or by taking the upper and lower lines separately:
_Q U T S R_ _K F G A S_. Seriation, it will be noticed, adds a
transposition to a substitution, so that what we have here is
combination cipher. This case, in short examples, is extremely
difficult; it is mentioned only by way of general information, and
is not included in the practice cryptograms which follow.


149.  By NEMO.  (Playfair.  Probable words:  ENEMY AGENTS).

OS CF WD OG DR AN PO AS OA DH SD EH XK FU CN DR PF UK SD.

150.  By NEMO.  (Playfair.  Probable words:  AUTHORIZED,  EMERGENCY).

PK HL PG RI YH YN HQ IF YF GY ZL EB YF UK NK NG FL FG OL BD GX GK FC PK HG NV AC ZL 
KH PK FG FK RZ FG RQ XO IB PB BD LE MV KG GY OL AD FK OR FC LK YN HL LK KZ IF EF AX 
NG ON BV IK BI PK IO HQ IF AG LX YA FK AD YG KO AK EG TO OH BI RB OL ON KM FO PK KY 
PR EF DZ IF AY QH CZ OK IQ WP FG LF DM CA VO GW PK NG KX KO LH AG NB RT NG KO KH HK 
OX ML GP ML PB QD RB OH EB LH NK NG FC PK KY QS LH NE IQ WP FG.

151.  By PICCOLA.  (Figure 164; new external alphabets. THE, THIS, CHARACTER).

NF BJ HT MD NF WJ GD UC HN FW QI CE HP NF IA SE HS HS LG QA IY QD HV CC LB NF IA IA 
CL GA RJ BD NM MA SY KU RD FT HC US HN GH VJ UA SY UL HN XJ EG QQ CJ LB NF KJ CN CS 
UK GJ MD NF IA FK NQ GJ XX.

152.  By PICCOLA.  ("Slidefair."  Probable word:  DESCENT).

AA FS AF XY GJ BD UI AA PW GN IV QZ RC NK CC WA FT QQ PR GP TT WF PS JS QC HM DI XC 
AH JP FB DC EW OX UG GP UI US CV GP MH QR OG JI ZR.

153.  By DAN SURR.  (Playfair.  History:  Detective Gettamann, investigating the
                    murder of Francis V. Bacon, well-known traveler, explorer, and
                    connoisseur, has found this message in an envelope addressed
                    to Wm. K. Pierce, former traveling companion of the deceased.
                    Death had occurred during sleep; caused by strangulation with
                    red silk thread.  Only clues found: a few grains of sand on the
                    kitchen floor and what appears to be an oriental turban).

YG NG CR FV FZ RI OU KZ CW OW BQ GQ IH HL YW EG NG QM WX RT KP VE CA IG QI VD QI GN 
GZ IZ QY QR HY NG XN AB AK OX NY WC WC TN OX DH NE IH IH YR IS QY WC HI UI UI IR QE 
WS RW LG WR AB GW VW CA RQ XM ER QM RE CW ZI RQ XW QW GH YC AY YO VO NE RL PG CG WI 
NX VW CA NX QM LH IG RQ WT GO UI GZ EG XN IW OU XT WO LH IG RQ XM WS QY TX IR IQ XM 
OG DU AB RM AK UM RG ZR XA PM RW LD KG HI XK LC RT KP VE FO NX XK WR WS QY UR ZX YL 
AT UI RH TR AV WS DH WQ PM AK IW OU WT DE IR WX RQ XZ SI GU QN IR XN IR YN IG GY TR 
ZX YU RU YL IQ YA RU KG QM PD QM IY HA WS FE RW GH RB HA QI QM GI QC QR UL WV AB NX 
GO HA FR IY QY BM QM YH NG IQ RU YL IQ BL PO QM RU GU IR TX SI GQ LQ DX XO EV BM CR 
FV GV AB GE RZ GQ YH HA RW YM NE YM BL VW PS.




CHAPTER XXII
Highlights of Fractional Substitution

Fractional substitution requires a cipher alphabet of the “multifid”
type; that is, one in which the symbols are composed of two or more
units, as in the Bacon and Trithemius alphabets (Chapter II: Figs. 3
and 4), the various “checkerboards” (Chapter XI), and so on. Polygram
“alphabets” are also of this type, and seriation is a forrn of
fractional substitution.

Among the older fractionals, we find a system called the “Pollux,” in
which the basis was the Morse telegraphic alphabet. There were three
units, the dot, the dash, and a separator (made necessary by the
irregular lengths of the substitutes). There was a first substitution
in which the letters of the text were replaced with their Morse
symbols, including the space. The resulting cryptogram, composed
entirely of the units dot, dash, space (. — x), was then subjected to
a second substitution, using a small cipher alphabet (either digits
or letters) in which each one of the three units might have any one
of several different substitutes, chosen at will. For instance, a dot
might be replaced with any one of digits 1, 8, 5, 6, a space with any
one of digits 3, 9, 0, and a dash with any one of digits 2, 4, 7.


                                   Figure 172

  Delastelle's "BIFID" Substitution -(Keyword Feature Added by M. E. OHAVER)

    Preparation of Alphabet:         Checkerboard Key:         Substitutes:

         G E N • R A L                     1 2 3 4 5              S = 43
         B C D F H I K                                            E = 15
         M O P Q S T U                 1   G B M V E              N = 24
         V W X Y Z                     2   C O W N D              D = 25
                                       3   P X F Q Y
                                       4   R H S Z A
                                       5   I T L K U
  Preliminary Substitution:

    S E N D S U P   P L I E S T O   M O R L E Y S   R I G H T A W   A Y.
    4 1 2 2 4 5 3   3 5 5 1 4 5 2   1 2 4 5 1 3 4   4 5 1 4 5 4 2   4 3
    3 5 4 5 3 5 1   1 3 1 5 3 2 2   3 2 1 3 5 5 3   1 1 1 2 2 5 3   5 5

  Re-Substitution:

  41 22 45 33 54 53 51   35 51 45 21 31 53 22   12 45 13 43 21 35 53
   R  O  A  F  K  L  I    Y  I  A  C  P  L  O    B  A  M  S  C  Y  L

        45 14 54 21 11 22 53   43 55      Transmitted:
         A  V  K  C  G  O  L    S  U.
                                       R O A F K   L I Y I A   C P L O B, etc.


We find also a number of systems called “Collon” in which the basis
is some one of the “checkerboards.” The text is subjected to a simple
substitution in the agreed alphabet, and the resulting cryptogram is
then subjected to a transposition, usually seriation, this being the
final operation.

A similar system called the “Mirabeau” uses an alphabet of the same
type as that of the _Polybius square_, in which only the digits
1-2-3-4-5 are significant. The remaining digits are all null, and
numbers like 67 or 88 may be inserted at will. Numbers are written
vertically (tens below units); then, in the taking off of the
cryptograms, the whole series of units is taken first, and the second
half of the cryptogram includes all of the tens-digits. In all of
these forms, the undesirable features are self-evident. The later
devices have added another operation: the regrouping of the scattered
units, and their reconversion into letters.

Classic examples are those described by Delastelle as “bifid” and
“trifid” (terms, incidentally, which some of our own writers find
objectionable, as they do also the term “multifid”). Delastelle’s
“bifid” cipher was of the kind shown in Fig. 172. A two-unit alphabet
must be used, and all possible two-unit combinations must be
convertible into letters. Any desired seriation-length may be agreed
upon, though it should not be divisible by 2. In the figure, the
key-word GENERAL, 7 letters, governs the seriation-length as well as
the mixing of the key-square, a feature suggested by Ohaver. The
substitution is identical with that of the Polybius square, except
that the two units of the substitute are written vertically below the
original. Digits are then grouped horizontally in pairs, treating one
seven-letter group at a time (if the seriation index is 7), and these
pairs are replaced with letters from the same key-square. It will be
noticed that we have here a form of polygram substitution, in which
one seven-letter group has been replaced with another. Also, that
possible errors have been confined by the seriation feature to their
own seven-letter group.

                                   Figure 173

          A Fractional Substitution Based on Morse Symbols - M.E.OHAVER

                      The Alphabet, Arranged by Group-Lengths:

                   E  .       S  ...         H  ....        B  -...
                   T  -       U  ..-         V  ...-        X  -..-
                              R  .-.         F  ..-.        C  -.-.
                              W  .--       ü    ..--        Y  -.--
                   I  ..      D  -..         L  .-..        Z  --..
                   A  .-      K  -.-       ä    .-.-        Q  --.-
                   N -.       G  --.         P  .--.      ö    ---.
                   M --       O  ---         J  .---      ch   ----

  S    E    N    D    S    U    P
  ...  .    -.   -..  ...  ..-  .--.          Reverse digits, and re-group:
  3    1    2    3    3    3    4             4    3    3    3    2    1    3
                                             ....  -.-  ...  ...  .-   .   --.
                                              H    K    S    S    A    E    G


Delastelle’s “trifid” cipher was of the same kind, except that a
three-unit alphabet was required, resulting in three rows of units.
It would have been the same as that of Fig. 4, Chapter II, but with
the French accented _E_ replacing the character _&_. All combinations
of three units must be re-convertible into letters.

Fig. 173 shows a form of “mutilation” cipher once published by
Ohaver. Beyond stating that its only key is the group-length (7 in
the example), we leave the student to figure it out for himself.

As an example of recent use (1918), we are told on excellent
authority that the Germans, for quite a long time during the World
War, used a field cipher of the following description: There was a
preliminary substitution using a key-square of the Nihilist type,
except that the external co-ordinates were letters, and not digits,
and were chosen in such a way that the five or six letters used were
letters having very distinctive Morse symbols; this was for the
avoidance of telegraphic errors. In some cases a 5 x 5 square was
used, containing only a 25-letter mixed alphabet, and in others a
6 x 6 square containing a 26-letter mixed alphabet and all of the
digits. The preliminary cryptogram obtained from this first
encipherment was then written into a transposition block and taken
off by columns, using key-word columnar transposition. The
cryptograms were not afterward shortened by resubstitution, but were
always twice as long as their messages, and never contained any other
letters than the five (or six) originally used as co-ordinates. This
German Field Cipher proved very effective until finally broken by the
great French analytical genius, Georges Painvin.

We shall make no attempt, here, to go into the decryptment of these
ciphers. The Delastelle “bifid” is, perhaps, a practical cipher, and
the student may try his own hand at analyzing the example. The other
examples should give no trouble.


154.  By PICCOLA.  (Delastelle's "Bifid." - Repeated words:  AMERICA(N), ATTEMPT,
                   REPORT, THAT, THE, OF, TO.  Other short words:  FROM, WITH,
                   BEEN, HAVE.  Likely words:  REPORT, AGENT, CONFIRM, CABLE, etc).

Q I N H P   R M L M G   R N B M A   H G T O L   O O E L O   A O D R I   N H W R O
A A B M M   I M M W I   B M D A B   T H D I L   T H T H I   N T L A Q   M C A M F
I V N K Y   N O F H B   I I T R F   Q L A D K   V Q I N H   P R M R B   H S L L U
A B M E T   S O A A B   M M I M M   I B P I V   R Q F T K   H I R D F   G N I E M
A B E N I   L M M P A   S I F I O   P L Y C C   R C I T W   I V W M F   G I O O S
O E R O I   K Q I E F   O V N V M   Q T D R S   I O E R I   B U Q C D   O A L L A
P L A A O   O C A Q O   M E I D C   N T I U L   O L Z D G.

The mixed alphabet here was placed in the square by straight horizontals. History:
Message intercepted following a report that on the tenth of August an attenpt had
been made to enter the American embassy in a country where Royalists are opposed to
a group of radicals.

155.  By PICCOLA.  (Fractional. - Not so hard).

3 3 3 2 3   1 1 1 2 3   2 2 1 3 1   1 1 1 3 1   3 3 1 1 3   2 2 1 2 2   1 1 2 3 1
2 3 3 2 1   2 3 3 1 1   3 2 1 1 2   1 2 2 2 3   1 2 2 2 3   1 1 2 2 1   2 3 2 3 2
2 1 2 3 1   3 3 2 3 1   1 2 2 1 3   2 1 2 2 3   2 1 3 1 2   2 2 2 3 2   3 2 2 2 2
3 1 1 1 3   1 2 3 2 1   1 2 2 2 3   2 3 1 3 2   2 2 2 1 2   3 1 2 2 1   2 1 2 2 1
1 2 2 3 2   3 2 2 3 2   2 2 3 2 2   3 3 1 2 2   3 1 2 1 3   1 1 1 1 2   1 3 3 3 3
1 2 3 3 3   2 1 3 3 1   1 1 1 2 2   3 1 1 3 1   1 1 1 1 1   1 1 3 2 2   1 2 3 2 2
2 1 2 1 2   1 2 2 2 3   3 2 2 1 3.

156.  By PICCOLA.  (Fractional. - Nor is this very hard).

E D C Y B   A Z C B Z   A V W X C   X B A E Y   D C B V A   E D W B X   A E Y Z D
A E Z V W   D C A E D   X C B Y D   Y Z V C B   W B A Z V   E W X B X   A E Y D C
B V A E W   D C X A E   Y Z D C E   Z V D W C   B E D X C   B Y A Z D   C B V W A
A E D C B   A E E W D   C B X Y D   C Y Z B V   A B A Z V   E W X A E   W D C X Y
E D Y Z C   B V E D C   W B A X E   D Z V C B   A C B V W   A X Y X B   Y A E D Z
E Y Z D V   W C W E D   X C B A D   Y Z V C B   A D C W B   A X E E D   C B A V E
D C X Y B   Z A E D C   B A E W D   Y Z C B V   A B A Z V   E W X E D   V W C X Y
X D C Y B   A Z C Z B   A V E W B   A E W D X   Y E D X Y   C Z V V E   D W C B A.




CHAPTER XXIII
Investigating the Unknown Cipher

When the type of encipherment is unknown, the decryptor’s first
problem may concern the probable language used in the plaintext, and
this he is usually able to determine from the source and history of
the cryptogram.

His second problem is the major classification, and this, too, is
usually simple, since transposition, as a rule, can be recognized by
its appearance. It must, however, respond to a group-test, and for
cases in which this is needed, the approximate percentages for English
can be taken as follows:

    Vowels, with or without Y,  about 40%  (Variation limits: 35% to 45%)
    Consonants L N R S T        about 30%  (Variation limits: 25% to 35%)
    Consonants J K Q X Z        about  2%  (May be influenced by nulls).

The 5% variation is suggested in the Parker Hitt Manual. In this
connection, it should be pointed out that an apparent transposition
with exactly 40% of vowels and 100% evenness in their distribution
is suspicious. Many of the checkerboard systems result in this way,
and also some of the codes based on pronounceable five-letter groups.
Then, too, it is easily possible to construct a simple substitution
cipher alphabet in such a way that the resulting cryptograms will
resemble transposition, and even respond satisfactorily to a
group-test. It should be carefully ascertained that a supposed
transposition cryptogram does not contain the many repeated sequences
which belong to simple substitution. As to those transpositions which
do show an appreciable number of repeated digrams, they will probably
have undergone one of the route transpositions, especially one in
which columns were taken off in alternating directions.

  * * *

Concerning the characteristics of simple substitution, these have
been seen throughout the text; we have normal frequencies attached
to the wrong letters, and we have those numerous repetitions of
various lengths, occurring at all kinds of intervals, which are never
found in a transposition. Here, too, we may apply a group-test, based
only on the relative frequencies of letters. The five most frequent
are supposed to represent the letters _E T A O N_ or their equivalents,
and should total about 45% of the text. The nine most frequent should
total about 70%; the eleven most frequent well over 75%; the five of
lowest frequency (which would include all of those totally absent)
should correspond to the normal behavior of the group _J K Q X Z_.

  * * *

If the simple substitution frequency count is present without the
repeated sequences, then we probably have a combination of simple
substitution with transposition. It becomes necessary to rewrite
the cryptogram into various new arrangements until one is found which
will bring back the repeated sequences. Ordinarily, the simplest
kinds of transposition will have been used; sometimes the
transposition will have taken place in a complete-unit block, and
there will be a clue in the total number of letters present in the
cryptogram.

  * * *

When all letters are present in the frequency count (or all but one
or two in the possible cases of 25-letter and 24-letter alphabets),
a period-investigation is usually indicated. The case of periodics
has been seen at considerable length, though a final hint might be
added for the detection of a possible Porta encipherment. One of our
many collaborators, F. R. Carter, suggests that any Porta cryptogram,
periodic or otherwise, ought to show from 52% to 53% of letters _N_
to _Z_ — the opposite of normal.

The characteristics of digram-encipherment have been mentioned. Other
polygram ciphers show corresponding characteristics, according to the
polygram length, though the trail grows fainter as polygrams grow
longer. A trigram-system, for instance, might be present when the
cryptogram is evenly divisible into three-letter groups; it might
suggest period 3, and might even show repeated sequences whose length
is a multiple of 3 and which begin at serial positions such as 1, 4,
7, 10, which are the beginnings of trigrams. A great many of the
trigram systems will show only repeated digrams beginning at these
serial positions, or separated by intervals which are divisible by 3.

A 5 x 5 square is often suggested in the fact of a missing letter;
but the fact of 26 letters does not deny one, since the careful
encipherer may make use of his missing _J_ instead of using _I_
exclusively. Great evenness in frequencies may suggest one of the
key-lengthening devices, such as autokey and progressing key; and
the practical absence of repeated sequences will usually mean that
a transposition has been added to a substitution. It is never a bad
idea, in a puzzling example, to make the various digram-counts (in
chart form): An actual digram count, in which every letter is
considered the beginning of a digram; a pair-count on separated
pairs, as in Playfair; the two counts which could be made with the
cryptogram marked off into three-letter groups; and the kind of
pair-count which could be made in Playfair if the first
cryptogram-letter were omitted. Many devices, as mentioned, may be
uncovered simply by “running down the alphabet.” And if the
cryptogram has come from an amateur “inventor,” it may be a case
of digging into one’s memory for previous “inventions.” With this
last case, however, the “inventor” very often fails to submit
material in proportion to the amount of complication he has introduced.

  * * *

Of the examples to follow, there is none in which the system may not
be learned through analysis, unless perhaps the final unnumbered
cryptogram, and the material, in every case, should be suffcient for
solution.

No. 163 follows Mr. Berkley’s encipherment plan, illustrated just
above it.

No. 164 is said to have been taken from a German spy serving in the
American army in France. This applies, however, to the first fifty
groups only; the remainder was added to increase the length and to
emphasize the plan followed by the spy.

No. 166 was accompanied by a plot:

“Supposed to have been found on the body of a man floating in San
Diego Bay. Autopsy shows death by drowning. Victim was a local banker
who had disappeared a few days earlier. Wife says no financial
worries. No money missing. Banker had prospered during depression.
Was yachting enthusiast. Our hero solved the cipher with the
unconscious assistance of a radio crooner. Tragedy occurred in
_August, 1932_.” The date was doubly underscored, but those who have
read the message have found no reason for this and no explanation
for the “crooner.”


157.  By PICCOLA.

C S R Z V   Y P Q Z J   K H K V Q   U U C V M   R T W Z N   G H Q S A   K O X P M
H D R W A   J D F Q D   F S R Z Z   C G X P A   J J T Z U   L H T G S   A H X J J
L T R N N   Z P B Z G   R E B N F   Y G E J N   M T N J J   Q H P J X   M O B J A
L X I A I   C P F J O   O F R N H.

158.  By PICCOLA.

O C E E A   T T I T K   S N D T D   S T H O O   Y E A O E   E P E B O   T Y T A O
A D S E O   E T F T T   T H R V W   C T H O Y   L T O O H   L R B T T   U H R R V
R A W O B   R U A O Y   E H H L A   B N E R L   R K V C R   I O N S E   I D R U E
R I P.

159.  By TITOGI.

A H Y N U   H C E S T   I T N D O   R F E H R   W E A T F   N R F P A   O T M A T
L H R E I   O T N R L   O D R H E   E A T E S   C T D I N   W T S T O   E A T S I
T E C D U   T M S O T   R L D O N   G N I I S   O F A E T   L I T A S.

160.  By PICCOLA. (Veiled reference to crypt No. 166?)

(a)  H Z M Q L  D N N D Z  S P R F S  K L L L L.       (b)  L I L V M  S T Z U G
D H Z U Q  X L L L L.       (c)  T V I U M  F R U O Y  U Q Y P S  F W X L L.
(d)  L I L V M  F P O E Y  Z K F D V  U E L L L.       (e)  G K P V D  Z T A Y T
B F Y Y C  F I U L L.       (f)  Q B F P W  Y C L U D  V P Z Z O  S W Y N C.
(g)  Q B R T F  F G V T U  E N S Z H  B Q E R L.

161.  By PICCOLA.

E G W G W   G E G T U   C L C U O   X G K Z T   E G O B G   B Y L W M   I Q N K Q
Y E N F S   C L H M N   Y B X S E   T N I W O   C E G C B   F C T C S   Z T V G B
E A E G T   U R K F K   B E G K X   B C T G Z   Y L X C H   Y E G C U   O X Y T Q
F A D Q T   T C U N B   O G C O H   X C E W E   C U V E G   C O C X Y   X G B E A
Y T K X F   Q C O T B   X N E G T   U C O N T   O P E L E   K U V U N   T O C N G
N G B K W   C E E C S   Z K W N H   E I K C C   R E G C T   E G T U R   K F K T B
R G M W X   C F G Q N   I C E B P   E E W E N   B K I Y F   K F D O F   E G N U C
B G M T Z   T F X C E   W E C F V   D T T U Z   T E N E G   W G L F M   C T O V L.

162.  By PICCOLA.

S P P A S   T A S E F   U N M T E   H S O O A   E S L E I   C T R C H   V U G S E
L Y R E M   E N E E R   O S N E H   I R A E T   O R N S H   M O D R O   P E A O R
P O S R Y   P D O I N   O C K G T.

         The "NICODEMUS" Cipher (Harold Berkley) SPECIMEN ENCIPHERMENT

Key:  M E T H O D I C     M E T H O D I C     M E T...
      6 3 8 4 7 2 5 1     6 3 8 4 7 2 5 1     6 3 8...
                                                                     Cryptogram:
      T H I S I S E N     A N S P O S E D     E T C...
      C I P H E R E D     U S I N G T H E                  PFGVT   VUHDG   LMRIV
      I V V I G E N E     S A M E K E Y F          ZOPUH   MMVNB   FOUDQ   WSURF
      R E A N D A F T     O R B O T H O P          BIOTP   FGHRU   VWHKR   RWEVV
      E R W A R D T R     E R A T I O N S  WULVA   MPGWV   MGEAQ   CUYHW   LBFUT.


163.  By PICCOLA.

T Y D Q V   W P A Z O   M B W B I   R K F I O   O G W C O   G E F L T   Q M S R F
X T C J C   M A W P P   Q M E X V   O Q C O C   Z F S F W   V F E V E   R S A B E
C V J J W   S I P P H   M M K O X   V Y I D B   D B C I S   Y N L J C   Y F K C W
E N Z E I   T J V L Z   M I L I I   R W K R O   O S Z A W   E K J V J   G F M Q K
G F N C K   H P B R D   L V I A P   E S L V M   D J Z Z V   F Z F F R   D B A D P
Q W E N L   A L O E K   M F M F W   X O K D W   D G C K K   K C Q R V.

164.  By VULPUS.

P E N A R   C P F T I   Q E V A T   E N B L A   T K Q F O   A R E N E   U I P E P
F U K X I   L C N F Q   E P C V B   T A W A O   B N C O E   T I N D W   B N A R D
Q F O F N   B V C P E   P G V G P   A V A P B   P F O A O   B S C L B   V B T F W
A N E W B   T C S D N   F M A N A   O E V A R   A R C T K   Q E N B M   B Q F V E
V B X K O   A P E T B   U I P F O   F Q E L E   O B R D R   B Q F U A   W A S C U
K L F P E   W B O C O   D N A M E   L G V F V   A N C N D   M F N B V   D T D L E
P F V I T   I Q E Q F   O C O A U   C L F L A   O B M E P   E N A S D   L B T K L
H N E P D.    .....     U I L A L   B O B M A   V K M G U   K R F P F   U B U D M
F W E T A   T I Q E V   B R C M B   W A N F Z   I L E N A   Q F W B T   C R D T B
T K O E P   E U A V A   O F N B S   C Z K V B   W C U B O   A L F O B   M E X I T
D Q C Q D   W A P F Q   E N A L A.

165.  By PICCOLA.  (Again that No. 166?)

R O V L L   A B T L D   L B C Q M   P X L B A   F B T C T   A T C O R   L T O L C
R H P D T   X L Y O A   E L B X P   H L X B T   X X Q L D   R G L T K   X R L G D
B K L D P   P L O H L   Y O A E L   K O M X B   L H O E L   V C R R C   R J L T K
D T L R C   I N X P L   L L T K X   L R C I N   X P L V D   B L V O R   L P O R J
L D J O L   F Y L I O   P O R X P   L M D E N   X E L K C   T T L V K   O L O H H
X E X G L   T O L I O   Q M E O Q   C B X L H   O E L T V   O L I X R   T B L B C
R I X L K   X L V D B   L D F P X   L T O L B   X R G L T   K X L B O   P A T C O
R L F Y L   E X T A E   R L Q D C   P L L B T   C P P L C   T L V O A   P G L F X
L V O E T   K L D R O   T K X E L   R C I N X   P L T O L   H C R G L   O A T L T
K X L N X   Y L L T K   C B L Q A   B T L F X   L T K X L   X W M P D   R D T C O
R L O H L   T K X L E   X H X E X   R I X L T   O L D L I   E O O R X   E L D R G
L T K X L   X Q M K D   B C B L O   R L D L G   D T X L L   M L B L T   K X L T V
O L I X R   T B L K D   B L R O T   L Y X T L   F X X R L   M D C G L.

166.  By CACHE. (Contributor, C. H. Price, died without explaining his key).

03 65 12 45 58 28 06 41 72 14 22 03 02 17 36 88 25 20 55 77 74 51 23 45 41 42 30 24 
36 61 96 09 07 78 05 44 08 06 55 92 16 93 02 15 36 37 40 87 41 01 33 77 06 36 27 54 
48 29 16 78 92 66 03 10 38 17 45 23 72 96 73 01 49 25 72 38 92 72 24 55 48 08 40 92 
28 01 72 96 02 04 74 61 06 99 30 45 72 69 74 93 77 23 55 36 24 93 47 84 76 35 32 89 
87 76 77 64 51 96 58 43 76 02 81 38 87 69 89 55 99 23 79 55 51 06 99 71 74 69 89 84 
27 25 22 39 42 53 19 93 41 66 09 75 87 37 91 87 90 91 43 19 40 30 38 16 96 22 69 38 
78 02 74 92 47 25 77 91 15 40 24 45 07 07 96 48 44 15 12 06 99 44 93 19 25 23 55 30 
45 87 96 18 01 78 44 29 45 86 47 69 48 30 66 44 03 41 66 37 38 22 06 42 41.
                                                                             59.

Here is one which nobody has ever been able to decrypt:

V Q B U P   P V S P G   G F P N U   E D O K D   X H E W T   I Y C L K   X R Z A P
V U F S A   W E M U X   G P N I V   Q J M N J   J N I Z Y   K B P N F   R R H T B
W W N U Q   J A J G J   F H A D Q   L Q M F L   X R G G W   U G W V Z   G K F B C
M P X K E   K Q C Q Q   L B O D O   Q J V E L.




APPENDIX


                   ENGLISH FREQUENCY AND SEQUENCE DATA

                 (Compiled from the MEAKER Digram Chart)

Order and Frequency of                              Order and Frequency of
    Single Letters                                     Leading DIGRAMS

E 1231   L  403   B  162                TH  315    TO  111    SA  75    MA  56
T  959   D  365   G  161                HE  251    NT  110    HI  72    TA  56
A  805   C  320   V   93                AN  172    ED  107    LE  72    CE  55
O  794   U  310   K   52                IN  169    IS  106    SO  71    IC  55
N  719   P  229   Q   20                ER  154    AR  101    AS  67    LL  55
I  718   F  228   X   20                RE  148    OU   96    NO  65    NA  54
S  659   M  225   J   10                ES  145    TE   94    NE  64    RO  54
R  603   W  203   Z    9                ON  145    OF   94    EC  64    OT  53
H  514   Y  188                         EA  131    IT   88    IO  63    TT  53
                                        TI  128    HA   84    RT  63    VE  53
                                        AT  124    SE   84    CO  59    NS  51
   Group Percentages:                   ST  121    ET   80    BE  58    UR  49
                                        EN  120    AL   77    DI  57    ME  48
A E I O U           38.58%              ND  118    RI   77    LI  57    WH  48
                                        OR  113    NG   75    RA  57    LY  47
L N R S T           33.43%
                                             List of Common REVERSALS:
J K Q X Z            1.11%
                                           ER RE   ON NO   TE ET   ST TS
E T A 0 N           45.08%                 ES SE   IN NI   OR RO   IS SI
                                           AN NA   EN NE   TO OT   ED DE
E T A O N I S R H   70.02%                 TI IT   AT TA   AR RA   OF FO

                    Order of the Leading TRIGRAMS
          In 10,000 Letters of Semi-Military Text - PARKER HITT

                THE      ENT      FOR      NCE      OFT
                AND      ION      NDE      EDT      STH
                THA      TIO      HAS      TIS      MEN

INITIAL LETTERS OF WORDS:

        Order, as found by M. E. OHAVER ... T A O   S H I W C   B P F D M R, etc.

        Order, as found by H. O. YARDLEY .. T O A   W B C D S   F M R H I Y, etc.

FINAL LETTERS OF WORDS:

        Order, as found by M. E. OHAVER ... E  S  T  D  N  R  O  Y, etc.

        Order, as found by H. O. YARDLEY .. E  T  D  N  S  R  Y, etc.

NOTE:  Lists of terminals (letters, digrams, trigrams); of common affixes,
       short words, and common pattern-words, can be found in the booklet
       "CRYPTOGRAM SOLVING", obtainable from the author, M.E.Ohaver, at
       Columbus, Ohio.

X J M M T   V O Z B N   Q M F B T   F S F N J   U G P S U   I J T B E  ?


             COMPARATIVE TABLE OF SINGLE-LETTER FREQUENCIES  (Per 100)

ENGLISH     GERMAN      FRENCH      ITALIAN     SPANISH     PORTUGUESE

A  7.81     A   5.      A  9.42     A 11.74     A 12.69     A  13.5
B  1.28     B   2.5     B  1.02     B   .92     B  1.41     B    .5
C  2.93     C   1.5     C  2.64     C  4.50     C  3.93     C   3.5
D  4.11     D   5.      D  3.38     D  3.73     D  5.58     D   5.
E 13.05     E  18.5     E 15.87     E 11.79     E 13.15     E  13.
F  2.88     F   1.5     F   .95     F   .95     F   .46     F   1.
G  1.39     G   4.      G  1.04     G  1.64     G  1.12     G   1.
H  5.85     H   4.      H   .77     H  1.54     H  1.24     H   1.
I  6.77     I   8.      I  8.41     I 11.28     I  6.25     I   6.
J   .23     J     ...   J   .89     J    ...    J   .56     J    .5
K   .42     K   1.      K    ...    K    ...    K    ...    K     ...
L  3.60     L   3.      L  5.34     L  6.51     L  5.94     L   3.5
M  2.62     M   2.5     M  3.24     M  2.51     M  2.65     M   4.5
N  7.28     N  11.5     N  7.15     N  6.88     N  6.95     N   5.5
O  8.21     O   3.5     O  5.14     O  9.83     O  9.49     O  11.5
P  2.15     P    .5     P  2.86     P  3.05     P  2.43     P   3.
Q   .14     Q     ...   Q  1.06     Q   .61     Q  1.16     Q   1.5
R  6.64     R   7.      R  6.46     R  6.37     R  6.25     R   7.5
S  6.46     S   7.      S  7.90     S  4.98     S  7.60     S   7.5
T  9.02     T   5.      T  7.26     T  5.62     T  3.91     T   4.5
U  2.77     U   5.      U  6.24     U  3.01     U  4.63     U   4.
V  1.00     V   1.      V  2.15     V  2.10     V  1.07     V   1.5
W  1.49     W   1.5     W    ...    W    ...    W    ...    W     ...
X   .30     X     ...   X   .30     X    ...    X   .13     X    .2
Y  1.51     Y     ...   Y   .24     Y    ...    Y  1.06     Y     ...
Z   .09     Z   1.5     Z   .32     Z   .49     Z   .35     Z    .3


                          Vowel Percentages:

English     German      French      Italian     Spanish     Portuguese

   40%          40%        45%         48%         47%          48%

                      Percentages for L N R S T:

   33%          34%        34%         30%         31%          29%


NOTES:  ENGLISH frequencies, which may be compared with those of Mr. Meaker,
        (A, 8.05;  B, 1.62;  C, 3.20; etc.), were taken from M.E.OHAVER.
        FRENCH, ITALIAN, and SPANISH frequencies were taken from a count
        made by the author. All four counts are based on 10,000 letters
        of literary text, and the dropping of the decimal point gives
        the actual count. The frequencies given for GERMAN and PORTUGUESE
        are approximations, reduced from other texts, probably military.

 



Chart Showing Normal CONTACT PERCENTAGES - Compiled by F. R. CARTER

                (Based on a Digram Chart by M.E.OHAVER)


    %                                                                                           %
  V. C.                                                                                       V. C.
  19 81       P4 L4 C5 D5 M5 N6 S6 W7 T8 R8 E11 H14   A   N21T17S12R10L8 D5 C4 M4             6 94
  55 45              Y4 B4 N5 T5 U8 D9 O9 S10A16E16   B   E34L17U11O9 A7 Y5 B4 R4            70 30
  61 39                       U4 O5 S8 N13A13I18E20   C   H19O19E17A13I7 T6 R4 L4 K4         59 41
  52 48                          R4 I5 L6 A10N29E39   D   E16I14T14A10O8 S6 U5               54 46
   8 92        C4 B4 E5 M5 V5 D5 S5 L5 N6 T6 R11H24   E   R15D10S9 N8 A7 T6 M5 E4 C4 O4 W4   21 79
  69 31                    S4 N5 F5 D5 A6 I7 E12O41   F   T22O21E10I9 A7 R5 F5 U4            52 48
  36 64                    O4 D4 U5 R5 I9 E9 A10N48   G   E14H14O12R10A8 T6 F5 W4 I4 S4      42 58
   7 93                          G4 E5 W5 S7 C9 T62   H   E50A23I12O7                        90 10
  13 87           F4 M4 W5 E6 N6 L8 D8 S8 R9 H11T14   I   N25T13S10O8 C7 R4 E4 M4 A4 L4      17 83
  28 72              Y7 W7 T7 S7 N7 E7 C7 B7 A14M29   J   U35O29A12E12M6 W6                  88 12
  53 47                 Y5 U5 I5 N7 A11R13E13O15C18   K   E34I21N10A9 T7 S6                  68 32
  52 48              N4 P4 T6 I7 B7 U7 O10E11L11A17   L   E19I15Y12L12O9 A8 D7 U4            65 35
  69 31                    S4 D4 M5 R5 I12A13O16E24   M   E26A17O12I11P5 M5                  71 29
  89 11                             U7 E14O22A23I24   N   D16T14G12E10A7 S7 O7 I6 C5         32 68
  21 79  M4 O4 D4 L4 P4 H5 N6 E6 C7 F7 S8 I8 R9 T11   O   N20F14R11U10T6 M5 L5 S4 W4 O4      18 82
  47 53        R4 L4 T4 N4 I4 P6 M6 A7 O8 U10E16S17   P   O17E16A15R15L8 U6 P6 T5 I5 S4      59 41
  20 80                       O10N10L10E10D10R20S30   Q   U100                              100 --
  70 30                       P5 I5 U5 T7 A13O16E30   R   E23O12A11T11I10S7 Y4               61 39
  48 52              D4 T4 O6 U6 R7 N8 S9 I11A16E18   S   T19E11O10I9 S9 A8 H6 P5 U4         41 59
  43 57           U4 O5 D6 T6 F7 R7 E8 I10N10S13A14   T   H39I10O10E8 A7 T6 R4               38 62
  35 65                    P5 F5 T5 L5 B6 D8 S9 O30   U   N18S13T13R12L10P7 B4 C4             8 92
  88 12                          R6 U10O16A16I16E30   V   E65I14O9 A8                        99  1
  48 52                    G4 D4 Y5 N9 S10T11O16E23   W   A27H16I16E15O11N4                  80 20
  95  5                                U5 N5 I16E74   X   P29T19I14A14U10C5 K5 O5            38 62
  24 76                       B4 N8 A8 T13E14R15L25   Y   A15O12S12T9 W7 H5 I5 E5 D4 M4 B4   38 62
  88 12                                O12N12A25I50   Z   E43I43W14                          86 14


    All figures indicate PERCENTAGES. - Taking any one letter, as A:  On the left, it was contacted
    14% of the time by H, 11% by E, etc., and 81% of its total contacts on that side were consonants.
    On the right, it was contacted 21% of the time by N, and 94%  of the time by consonants.

 


  Chart Showing FREQUENCIES of English DIGRAMS - Prepared by O. PHELPS MEAKER

            (Actual Count Made on 10,000 Letters of Literary Text).
                                                                                             
       A  B  C  D│  E│ F  G   H   I  J  K  L  M   N   O  P  Q   R   S   T  U  V  W  X  Y  Z
 A     1  8 44 45│131│21 11  84  18       34 56  54   9 21     57  75  56 18 15 32  3 11             805
 B    32       18│ 11│ 2  2   1   7        7  9   7  18  1      4  13  14  5          11             162
 C    39    12  4│ 64│ 9  1   2  55        8  1  31  18        14  21   6 17     3  5 10             320
 D    15       10│107│ 1  1   1  16       28  2 118  16        16   6   9 11     4     4             365
 E       58 55 39│ 39│25 32 251  37  2 28 72 48  64   3 40    148  84  94 11 53 30  1 12  5         1231
 F    10     1 12│ 23│14  3   2  27        5      8  94         6  13   5  1     1     3             228
 G    18        2│ 20│ 1  1      10        1     75   3         6   6   1 12           5             161
 H          46  3│ 15│ 6 16   5               1   9   3  7      3  30 315  2    48     5             514 
 I    16  6 15 57│ 40│21 10  72         8 57 26  37  13  8     77  42 128  5 19 37  4 18  2          718 
 J        2     1│  1│ 1                   1      3             1                                     10 
 K    10     8   │  2│            8        3      3   5        11   2                                 52 
 L    77 21 16  7│ 46│10  4   3  39       55     10  17 29     12   6  12 28     4     6  1          403 
 M    18  1     9│ 43│ 3  1   1  32        4  5   7  44        15  14  14  9     1     4             225 
 N   172        5│120│ 2  3   2 169     3  1  3   9 145        12  19   8 33    10     3             719 
 O     2 11 59 37│ 46│38 23  46  63  4  3 28 28  65  23 28     54  71 111  2  6 17  1 28             794 
 P    31     1  7│ 32│ 3  1   1   3        2 16   7  29 26      8  24   8 17     2  4  7             229 
 Q     1        1│ 14│                     2                        2                                 20 
 R   101  6  7 10│154│ 4 21   8  21        2      5 113 42     18   6  30 49     1     5             603 
 S    67  5  1 32│145│ 8  7   3 106     2 12  6  51  37  3     39  41  32 42     3    17             659 
 T   124    38 39│ 80│42 13  22  88     1 19  6 110  53 14     63 121  53 45     6  1 21             959 
 U    12 25 16  8│  7│11  8   2      4     8 13  12  96  7 20   6  30  22        1  1  1             310 
 V    24        4│ 16│ 1         14        2      4  13         5   2   4        1     3              93 
 W     7     1  9│ 41│ 4  2   7   1     3  5  2  15  36  1     10  27  16        2    14             203 
 X               │ 17│            1               1                        1                          20 
 Y    27 19     6│ 17│ 1  1   1         3 47  3  14   4  2     17   4  21  1                         188 
 Z     1         │   │            4                   2                    1              1            9

         To learn the frequency of any digram, find its first letter at the top, find its second
         letter at the side, and observe the figure in the cell at which the column headed by the
         first letter crosses the row headed by the second.  Frequency for EA, 131; for AE, zero.


                             SOME FOREIGN LANGUAGE DATA

       NOTE:  Frequencies of letters, and their order, are fixed quantities
              in any language.  Group frequencies, however. are fairly constant
              in every language. (These may be computed from the Comparative
              Table for any desired group in the languages given.) Of the material
              which follows, portions came from Lange and Soudart, and from Valerio,
              but exact sources were not in every case furnished to the author.


                                     G E R M A N

Order of single letters:  E N I R S A D T U G H O L B M C F W Z K V P   (J Q X Y)

Order of digrams:   EN ER CH DE GE EI IE IN NE ND BE EL TE UN ST DI NO UE SE AU RE HE

Order of trigrams:   EIN ICH DEN DER TEN CHT SCH CHE DIE UNG GEN UND NEN DES BEN RCH

Order of tetragrams:   ICHT KEIT HEIT CHON CHEN CHER URCH EICH DERN AUCH SCHA SCHE

                           SCHI SCHO SCHU   (Furnished by JOSEPH ARTHOLD).

Peculiarities:

             C is practically always followed by H (or K), and SC by H.
             Word-length is normally greater than in English.


                                     F R E N C H

Order of single letters:   E A I S T N R U L O D M P C V Q G B F J H Z X Y   (K W)

Order of digrams:   ES EN OU DE NT TE ON SE AI IT LE ET ME ER EM OI UN QU

Order of trigrams:   ENT QUE ION LES AIT TIO ANS ONT ANT OUR AIS OUS


Peculiarities:
             Q followed by U and a second vowel.
             Four and five vowels may be found in sequence ("J'ai oui dire.."), but
             E seldom touches the other vowels.   D and M contact E about 75% of the
             time, and L contacts it over 50% of the time.  It is unusual to find
             more than four consonants in sequence; when five are found in
             succession, one is almost surely the final S of a plural word.

Order of doubled letters:  S L M R T N P E C F
Order of initials:   P A S M C E D T V F R B L G J I Q N O H U Y X Z
Order of finals:     E S T R N D A I X Z L C U P F Y

Average word-length:  4.3  letters.
Commonest short words, in order:  DE IL LE ET QUE JE LA NE UN LES EN CE SE SON MON
                                  PAS LUI ME AU UNE DES SA QUI EST DU


                                      I T A L I A N

Order of single letters:   E A I O N L R T S C D P U M V G H F B Q Z   (J X K W Y)

Order of digrams:   ER ES ON RE EL EN DE DI TI SI AL AN RA NT TA CO

Order of trigrams:   CHE ERE ZIO DEL ECO QUE ARI ATO EDI IDE ESI IDI ERO PAR NTE STA


Peculiarities:
             Q followed by U and a second vowel.   H largely preceded by C, in CHE,CHI,
             or sometimes by G in GHE GHI.  Z most often part of ZIO or NZA.
             The frequencies of the vowels E A I O often exchange places.
             Doubling of consonants is very frequent.

Order of doubled letters:   L T S C R G P N B M Z F V I D
Order of initials:   S P A C D V T M F I G Q R E B L N O U Z H
Order of finals:   O  E  A  I     (Others, if used:  R L D N)

Average word-length:   4.5 letters.
Commonest short words, in order:  LA DI CHE IL NON SI LE UNA LO IN PER UN MI IO PIU
                                    DEL MA SE


                                    S P A N I S H

Order of single letters:   E A O S N I R L D U C T M P B H Q G V Y J F Z X   (K W)

Order of digrams:   ES EN EL DE LA OS AR UE RA RE ER AS ON ST AD AL OR TA CO

Order of trigrams:   QUE EST ARA ADO AQU DEL CIO NTE OSA EDE PER IST NEI RES SDE


Peculiarities:
              Q followed by U and a second vowel.  The only doubles are
              LL, RR, CC, EE, NN, OO, in the order given, but the latter three
              are very rare.  Group frequencies somewhat less stable than
              in the other languages.

Order of initials:   C P A S M E D T H V R U N I L B O F Q G J Z
Order of finals:   O A S E N R D L I Z

Average word-length:  4.4 letters.
Commonest short words, in order:   DE LA EL QUE EN NO CON UN SE SU LAS LOS ES ME AL
                                     LO SI MI UNA DEL POR SUS MUY HAY MAS


                                P O R T U G U E S E

Order of single letters:   A E O R S I N D M T U C L P Q V F G H B J Z X   (K W Y)

Order of digrams:   ES OS DE AS RO EN CO DO RE ER NT SE AD OR AO SA TE AR EM QU UE OD ST

Order of trigrams:   QUE ENT NTE DES EST ODE ADO CON STA MEN ADE DOS ARA COM

     Much like Spanish.  Spanish cion becomes cao; ll becomes lh.  Articles drop
     the L:  os, as, in place of Spanish los, las, etc.




BIBLIOGRAPHY
By W. D. Witt

An extended bibliography of cryptography would fill many pages and
is therefore beyond the scope of this work, but it is hoped that the
following short selected list will be found useful. Some of these
works are out of print or otherwise unobtainable, but may, in some
instances, be found in public libraries or in old bookstores. The
Riverbank Publications may be consulted at The Library of Congress,
Washington, D. C.


More or Less Elementary Works

Boyer, John Q. “The Cryptogram” in Real Puzzles by John Q. Boyer,
Rufus T. Strohm and George H. Pryor, pp. 147-154. Baltimore, 1925.
(Simple substitution ciphers only.)

Buranelli, Prosper, Margaret Petherbridge and F. Gregory Hartswick.
The Cryptogram Book. New York, 1928. (Simple substitution ciphers
only.)

Hitt, Parker (Colonel). The A B C of Secret Writing. New York, 1935.

Lysing, Henry, pseud. (John Leonard Nanovic). Secret Writing. New
York, 1936.

―. The Cryptogram Book. New York, 1937.

Mansfield, Louis C. S. The Solution of Codes and Ciphers. London,
1936.

―. One Hundred Problems in Cipher. London, 1936.

Ohaver, M. E. Cryptogram Solving. Columbus, Ohio, 1933, (Simple
substitution ciphers only.)

Thomas, Paul B. Secret Messages. New York and London, 1928. 2nd
printing, 1929.

Windolph, J. Fred (“Phil Down”). “Cryptograms: Their Construction and
Solution” in A Key to Puzzledom, pp. 53-64. New York, 1906. (Simple
substitution ciphers only.)

Yardley, Herbert Osborne (Major). Yardleygrams. Indianapolis, 1932.
(The London edition (1932) bears the title Ciphergrams.)


Advanced Works

Friedman, William F. (Lt.-Colonel). Elements of Cryptanalysis.
Washington, Gov. Printing Office, 1924. “For Offcial Use Only.”
(Contains a bibliography. Out of print and unobtainable.)

―. See also Riverbank Publications.

Givierge, Marcel (General). Cours de Cryptographie. Paris, 1st
edition, 1925, 2nd edition, 1932.

Hitt, Parker (Colonel). Manual for the Solution of Military Ciphers.
Fort Leavenworth, Kans., 1st edition, 1916, 2nd edition, 1918.

Riverbank Publications. Papers (except No. 19) by W. F. Friedman.
Department of Ciphers, Riverbank Laboratories, Geneva, Illinois.
      No. 15, 1917. “A Method of Reconstructing the Primary Alphabet.”
      No. 16, 1918. “Methods for the Solution of Running-key Ciphers.”
      No. 17, 1918. “An Introduction to Methods for the Solution of
                     Ciphers.”
      No. 18, 1918. “Synoptic Tables for the Solution of Ciphers, and
                     a Bibliography of Cipher Literature.”
      No. 19, 1918. “Formulae for the Solution of Geometrical
                     Transposition Ciphers,” by Captain Lenox R. Lohr,
                    with an introduction by W. F. Friedman.
      No. 20, 1918. “Several Machine Ciphers and Methods for Their
                     Solution.”
      No. 21, 1918. “Methods for the Reconstruction of Primary
                     Alphabets.”
      No. 22, 1922. “The Index of Coincidence and Its Applications in
                     Cryptographic Analysis.”

Sacco, Luigi (General). Manuale di crittografia. Rome, 2nd edition,
revised and enlarged, 1936. (The first edition was privately printed
under the title Nozioni di crittografia. Rome, 1930.)

Zanotti, Mario. Crittografia. Milan, 1928.


Miscellaneous (Primarily descriptive of systems, historical, special
essays, etc., usually with little on cryptanalysis.)

Anon. “Cryptography” in Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 6, 14th
edition, New York and London, 1929. (Contains a bibliography.)

Ball, W. W. Rouse. “Cryptographs and Ciphers” in his Mathematical
Recreations and Essays. 7th edition, 1917 and later. (Latest edition
is the 11th, 1939.)

Blair, William. “Cipher in Diplomatic Affairs” in Rees’s Cyclopaedia.
1803-1819.

Candela, Rosario. The Military Cipher of Commandant Bazeries, An
Essay in Decrypting. New York, 1938.

Friedman, William F. (Lt.-Colonel). “Codes and Ciphers” in
Encyclopaedia Britannica, Vol. 5, 14th edition, New York and London,
1929. (Contains bibliography.)

―. “Edgar Allan Poe, Cryptographer” in American Literature, A Journal
of Literary History, Criticism and Bibliography, Vol. 8, No. 3, Nov.
1936, pp. 266-280. Duke University, Durham, N. C.

Hulme, Frederick Edward. Cryptography, or, The History, Principles
and Practice of Cipher-Writing. London, 1898.

Lange, André and E. A. Soudart. Traité de Cryptographie. Paris, 1st
edition, 1925, new edition, 1935. (Contains an extensive bibliography.)

Lange, André. Cryptography. Translated from the French by J. C. H.
Macbeth, London and New York, 1922.

Pratt, Fletcher. Secret and Urgent, The Story of Codes and Ciphers.
Indianapolis, 1939.

Yardley, Herbert Osborne (Major). The American Black Chamber.
Indianapolis and London, 1931. Reprinted, New York, 1933, London,
1934.


THE COMMONEST ENGLISH WORDS

Below are listed the hundred most frequently used words in English.
The figures give occurrences in 242,432 words of English text taken
from fifteen English authors and many newspapers. Compiled by Frank
R. Fraprie, after the rest of the book had been completed.


  THE  15568       OR    1101       WHEN   603       ONLY   309
  OF    9767       HER   1093       WHAT   570       ANY    302
  AND   7638       HAD   1062       YOUR   533       THEN   298
  TO    5739       AT    1053       MORE   523       ABOUT  294
  A     5074       FROM  1039       WOULD  516       THOSE  288
  IN    4312       THIS  1021       THEM   498       CAN    285
  THAT  3017       MY     963       SOME   478       MADE   284
  IS    2509       THEY   959       THAN   445       WELL   283
  I     2292       ALL    881       MAY    441       OLD    282
  IT    2255       THEIR  824       UPON   430       MUST   280
  FOR   1869       AN     789       ITS    425       US     279
  AS    1853       SHE    775       OUT    387       SAID   276
  WITH  1849       HAS    753       INTO   387       TIME   273
  WAS   1761       WERE   752       OUR    386       EVEN   272
  HIS   1732       ME     745       THESE  385       NEW    265
  HE    1727       BEEN   720       MAN    383       COULD  264
  BE    1535       HIM    708       UP     369       VERY   259
  NOT   1496       ONE    700       DO     360       MUCH   252
  BY    1392       SO     696       LIKE   354       OWN    251
  BUT   1379       IF     684       SHALL  351       MOST   251
  HAVE  1344       WILL   680       GREAT  340       MIGHT  250
  YOU   1336       THERE  668       NOW    331       FIRST  249
  WHICH 1291       WHO    664       SUCH   328       AFTER  247
  ARE   1222       NO     658       SHOULD 327       YET    247
  ON    1155       WE     638       OTHER  320       TWO    244


ENGLISH TRIGRAMS

The ninety-eight most frequent English trigrams, combining a count
of 20,000 trigrams by Fletcher Pratt, in “Secret and Urgent,” supposed
not to include overlaps between words, and 5,000 by Frank R. Fraprie,
including overlaps. This table and the following one are not referred
to in the text, having been compiled since the completion of the book.


  THE    1182       HER     170       HIS     130       ITH     111
  ING     356       ATE     165       RES     125       TED     110
  AND     284       VER     159       ILL     118       AIN     108
  ION     252       TER     157       ARE     117       EST     106
  ENT     246       THA     155       CON     114       MAN     101
  FOR     191       ATI     148       NCE     113       RED     101
  TIO     188       HAT     138       ALL     111       THI     100
  ERE     173       ERS     135       EVE     111       IVE      96

  REA      95       INE      73       ORE      65       ART      58
  WIT      93       WHI      71       BUT      64       NTE      58
  ONS      92       OVE      71       OUT      63       RAT      58
  ESS      90       TIN      71       URE      63       TUR      58
  AVE      84       AST      70       STR      62       ICA      57
  PER      84       DER      70       TIC      62       ICH      57
  ECT      83       OUS      70       AME      61       NDE      57
  ONE      83       ROM      70       COM      61       PRE      57
  UND      83       VEN      70       OUR      61       ENC      56
  INT      80       ARD      69       WER      61       HAS      56
  ANT      79       EAR      69       OME      60       WHE      55
  HOU      77       DIN      68       EEN      59       WIL      55
  MEN      76       STI      68       LAR      59       ERA      54
  WAS      76       NOT      67       LES      59       LIN      54
  OUN      75       ORT      67       SAN      59       TRA      54
  PRO      75       THO      66       STE      59
  STA      75       DAY      65       ANY      58


ENGLISH DIGRAMS

The one hundred and nine most frequent English digrams, compiled from
a count of 20,000 trigrams by Fletcher Pratt, in “Secret and Urgent,”
supposed not to include overlaps between words, and 5,000 by Frank R.
Fraprie, including overlaps.


  TH  1582     RO   275     WI   188     SA   146     CT   111
  IN   784     LI   273     HO   184     NI   142     TU   108
  ER   667     RI   271     TR   183     RT   142     DA   107
  RE   625     IO   270     BE   181     NA   141     AM   104
  AN   542     LE   263     CE   177     OL   141     CI   104
  HE   542     ND   263     WH   177     EV   131     SU   102
  AR   511     MA   260     LL   176     IE   129     BL   101
  EN   511     SE   259     FI   175     MI   128     OF   101
  TI   510     AL   246     NO   175     NG   128     BU   100
  TE   492     IC   244     TO   175     PL   128
  AT   440     FO   239     PE   174     IV   127
  ON   420     IL   232     AS   172     PO   125
  HA   420     NE   232     WA   171     CH   122
  OU   361     LA   229     UR   169     EI   122
  IT   356     TA   225     LO   166     AD   120
  ES   343     EL   216     PA   165     SS   120
  ST   340     ME   216     US   165     IL   118
  OR   339     EC   214     MO   164     OS   117
  NT   337     IS   211     OM   163     UL   115
  HI   330     DI   210     AI   162     EM   114
  EA   321     SI   210     PR   161     NS   113
  VE   321     CA   202     WE   158     OT   113
  CO   296     UN   201     AC   152     GE   112
  DE   275     UT   189     EE   148     IR   112
  RA   275     NC   188     ET   146     AV   111




INDEX

Amateurs, devices proposed by, 132, 140, 152
“Amsco” transposition cipher, 51
Anagramming, 22, 29, 45-50
Anagramming, multiple, 32, 56-68
“Aristocrats,” 69, 72, 88
Auto-encipherment, 146-158

Bacon’s biliteral cipher, 6
Basic cipher alphabet, 164
Bassières processes for autokey, 147-151
Beaufort ciphers, 121
“Bifid” substitution, 210
Book cipher, 106

“Caesar” alphabets, 69, 71, 100, 108, 118, 130
Characteristics of systems, 53, 100, 103, 105, 130, 153, 168,
     201-203, 213-214
“Checkerboard” alphabets, 102, 104, 164, 209
Cipher, meaning of, 1
Cipher alphabets, 69, 130, 159, 172, 185
Cipher disks, 108, 111
Cipher disks, special application of, 192
Classification of ciphers, 1
Classification of substitutions, 68
Code, 1, 106
Collon systems, 209
Columnar transposition, 11, 17, 23, 37-52
Columnar transposition, double, 54
“Columns” in autokeyed ciphers, 146
Combination block, 44
Combination cipher, 1, 4, 6, 68, 207, 209, 213, 216
Complements, complementary alphabets, 123
Complete-unit transposition, 9
Concealment cipher, meaning of, 1
Concealment ciphers, 4-8
Consonant-line method for simple substitution, 88
Contact count, 74, 77, 83, 173
Conventional writing, 4
“Crypt,” 72, 91
Cryptanalysis, meaning of, 3
Cryptogram, meaning of, 1
Cryptographic security, 2
Cycle (see period or unit)
Cyclical encipherment, 186, 200

Deciphering alphabet (or key), 71, 104
Decipherment, meaning of, 1
Decoding, meaning of, 2
Decrypt, meaning of, 1
Definitions, miscellaneous, 1, 68-70
Dictionary cipher, 106
Digram, meaning of, 1
Digram count, 83
Digram-solution method for simple substitution, 83
Digram tests, 45, 46, 47, 50
Dissimulated writing, 4
Double-key substitution, meaning of, 68
Double Myszkowsky transposition, 60
Double substitutions, 155, 164, 193
Double transpositions, 18, 54

Empty, or negative, words, 76
Encipherment, meaning of, 1
Encoding, meaning of, 2
“Entry,” 74
Equivalent slide (or alphabet), 169, 180

Factoring, in transpositions, 12, 42
Factoring of intervals to find a period, 128, 132
“Force Method,” 90
Fractional substitution, meaning of, 68
Fractional substitutions, 209-212
Frequency (see statistics)
Frequency counts, 74, 83, 129, 161, 173
“Frequential checkerboard,” 105

German field cipher (the ADFGVX), 210
Grandpré’s word-square, 104-105
Graph, graphic appearance, 106, 131, 173
Grille, Fleissner’s, 26
Grille, Richelieu’s, 4
Grille, Sacco’s indefinite, 12
Grille, turning, 26
Gronsfeld cipher, 117
Group-application in polyalphabetic ciphers, 185
Group percentages (see statistics)

Hermann cipher, 143

Index-letter (or cell), 111, 119, 124, 143, 169
Indicators, 101, 143
Intervals, alphabetical and lineal, 169, 180, 193, 194
Intervals in cryptograms, 43, 127
Inverse alphabets, 69
Irregular transposition, 37-67
Isolating a cipher alphabet, 122

Kasiski method, 127
Key, meaning of, 1
Key-alphabet, 108
“Key-frame” (or “skeleton”), 86, 175, 206
Key-interruption, 143
Key-length, 11, 17, 42, 127, 147
Key-lengthening devices in Vigenère, 143
Key-letter, 108
“Key-phrase” cipher, 103
Keys for simple substitution, 69
Keys, preparation of, 17, 26, 70, 104
Keys, recovery of, 23, 33, 39, 40, 45, 50, 58-63, 64, 85, 106, 124,
     150, 157, 163, 164, 167, 175-183, 188-190, 205
Keywords, uses of, 17, 70, 146, 169
Knight’s tour, 10

Legrand’s open-letter cipher, 5
Levine’s concealment ciphers, 7
“Lining up” frequency counts, 162-163
Low-frequencies, assistance from, 99, 100, 129, 136, 138, 160
Low-frequency contacts, 78, 174

Magic squares, 10
Mathematical aspects of multiple-alphabet ciphers, 142, 151, 193, 196
Mechanical methods, 21, 32, 45, 56-58, 133, 138, 149
Military aspects of ciphers, 3, 55
Mirabeau’s cipher, 209
Mixed alphabets, 70, 169
Monoalphabetic substitution, meaning of, 68
Morse alphabet, 210
“Multifid” alphabets, 209
Multi-literal substitutes, 6, 7, 104
Multiple-alphabet ciphers, 108-197
Multiple-alphabet substitution, meaning of, 68
Multiple messages, 56, 85, 140, 146, 185
Multiple-substitutional encipherment, Multiple substitutes, 68, 99,
     102, 103, 159
Myszkowsky’s transposition, 51

Negative, or empty, words, 76
“Nicodemus” cipher, 216
Nihilist number-cipher, 164-168
Nihilist transposition cipher, 17, 53
Novelty ciphers, 100, 214
Null cipher, 4
Nulls, legitimate uses of, 37, 55, 110, 201
Nulls, meaning of, 9
Numbers and symbols, encipherment of, 101
Numbers used as substitutes, 154-157, 159-168

Ohaver method for period finding, 160
Open-letter cipher, 4

Pair-count, 202
Pair-encipherment, 198, 199, 200
Parallel frequency counts, 162, 165, 177
“Pattern words,” 73
Pentagram, meaning of, 1
Periodic ciphers, 108-184
“Period” in autokey ciphers, 146
Period, periodicity, 108, 112-114, 127, 138, 166, 195
“Phillips” cipher, 185
Phonetic alphabets, 106
Playfair cipher, 200
“Pointers” for vowel-spotting, 78
Pollux systems, 209
Polyalphabetic ciphers, names of, 108
Polyalphabetic substitution, meaning of, 68
Polyalphabetic substitutions, 108-197
Polybius square, 164, 209
Polygram substitution, meaning of, 68
Polygram substitutions, 198-208
Porta cipher, 118
Primary cipher alphabet, 164, 169
Primary cryptogram (see double transpositions or double substitutions)
Probable word methods, 23, 29, 34, 37, 99, 113, 119, 124, 147,
     202, 206
Progression, Progression index, 192
Puncture cipher, 4

“Quagmires” cipher, 182

“Rail fence” transpositions, 12
Reciprocal substitution, 70, 118, 121, 123
Rectangular transposition, 11
“Route cipher,” 14
Route transposition, 11
“Running down the alphabet,” 72, 100, 118, 124, 139, 185, 192, 214
“Running key,” 143

Saint-Cyr cipher, 110
Scytale, 14
Secondary cipher alphabets, 164, 169
Sequence (see statistics)
Seriation, Seriation index, 207, 210
Shift, Shifted alphabets, 69, 70, 72, 108, 119, 133, 172, 177
Short word method for divided cryptograms, 72
Simple substitution, meaning of, 68
Simple substitutions, 69-107
Slides, slide-rules
	for decrypting, 141
	for encipherment, 110, 119, 123, 169, 170
	used in transposition, 13, 61
Specific key, 169
Statistics, some uses of, 14, 18, 21, 40-42, 45-50, 57, 73, 75,
     78-85, 88, 113, 130, 141, 150, 153, 174, 187, 201, 202, 213
“Step-up” and “step-down” letters, 89
“Straddling” devices, 105
Strips
	used in decryptment of transpositions, 15
	used for encipherment of polyalphabeticals, 108
	used for decryptment of periodics, 136
Substitutes, 68
Substitution cipher, meaning of, 1
Substitution ciphers, 68-212
Symbols, 68
“Symmetry of position,” 176

Tableaux:
	Vigenère, 109
	Porta, 118
	Beaufort, 121
	used for decryptment of periodics, 134
	formed in autokey decryptment, 150
	high-frequency co-efficients, 152
	imaginary, or formed in key-recovery, 170-172, 178
	Delastelle, 177
	for finding alphabetical intervals, 194
	for pair-encipherment, 198
“Taking off” (Transcription), 9, 17, 23, 60
Terminals (see statistics)
Tetragram, meaning of, 1
Transformation device, 102
Transposition, meaning of, 1
Transposition ciphers, 9-67
Trial key, 111, 150
“Trifid” substitution, 210
Trigram, meaning of, 1
Trigram encipherment, 199
Trigram method of solution:
	applied to Beaufort, 125
	applied to Gronsfeld, 117
	applied to Porta, 119
	applied to Vigenère, 113
	with the use of a slide, 141
Trithème’s alphabet, 7

Unit, 9, 18
United States Army Cipher Disk, 108, 123
United States Army Double Transposition, 54

Variant Beaufort cipher, 121
Variety of contact, 75, 78, 88, 174, 204
Variety count, 75, 88
Vigenère cipher, 108
Vowel-distribution (see statistics)
Vowel-line method for simple substitution, 91
Vowel-solution method, 78, 174

Word-spacers, 100
“Writing-in” (Inscription), 9, 17, 23, 60




Transcriber's Note

The original figures were made with a typewriter, and then lines,
arrows, or circles were added. This file reproduces them as well
as is possible as plain text. Please see the HTML version if you
wish to see the figures with all of their details.

Minor corrections, such as removing extra spaces or punctuation, or
adding missing spaces or punctuation or diacritical marks, were made
without note. Archaic and inconsistent spelling was retained. In two
places, the number of a referenced figure was corrected. Grammar and
spelling were only corrected as in the following list of notable
changes.

In two places, “diagram” was corrected to “digram”.

In three places, “direct” was corrected to “directly”.

In Chapter III, we italicized the first occurrence of “magic square”
because it seemed like the author’s intention. In the same chapter,
“said be clockwise” was corrected to “said to be clockwise”.

In Figure 43, “ISGAY” was corrected to “ISGAU” to match previous
figures and to correct spelling in the plaintext.

In Chapter VII, “those who like method” was corrected to “those who
like this method”.

In Chapter XVIII, “misuse of the Type II slide” was corrected to
“misuse of the Type I slide”.

In Figure 139, “IQCIO” is corrected to “IQVIO”.

In the Appendix, in the list of English trigrams, “WHI 51” was
corrected to “WHI 71”.

Some corrections were made to the exercises in order to rectify the
spelling in their plaintexts or (in one case) to resolve an
inconsistency in its key.

In exercise 33, seven letters were missing. The uncorrected cryptogram
is VINSC FEAEO OHSEF HLEHU NSTNC LTSLC IAESH RHSIR ERMTS ETEPD TOINM
RTTHT TLRUB E.

Exercise 110: “LRSFQ” corrected to “IRSFQ”.

Exercise 115: “FBEHZHWU” corrected to “FBEHZHWG”.

Exercise 116: “HVIYF” corrected to “HVXYF”.

Exercise 128: “JQAOJ” corrected to “JQAOI” and “QNUSG” to “QNUSU”.

Exercise 130: “FBWXJ” corrected to “FRWXJ”.

Exercise 138: “XVKFV” corrected to “XVKEV”.

Exercise 141: “KFTFB” corrected to “KFTFX”.

Exercise 144: “TAJNI WRDB” corrected to “TAJNW ARDB”.

Exercise 145: “TTHNY” corrected to “TTHNJ”.

Exercise 146: “PGOUR” corrected to “PGOUJ” and “VDDMH” corrected
to “VDDMP” (we are not sure about “VFCFT”).

Exercise 147: “UVSYC” corrected to “UBSYC”, “IXYDY” to “IXYPY”,
“VXOOK” to “NXOOK”, and “NNHMM” to “NNHWM”.

Exercise 149: “MS” corrected to “PF”.

Exercise 153: “QY BN QM” corrected to “QY BM QM” and “BL PK QM”
to “BL PO QM”.

Exercise 40 has error(s) in the first 25 letters. We do not know
what was the intention of its creator.

The above list should not be assumed to be correct or complete.

We wish to thank the anonymous proof-readers who volunteered at the
British National Cipher Challenge (www.cipherchallenge.org).





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ELEMENTARY CRYPTANALYSIS ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of Passages from the Life of a Philosopher
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Passages from the Life of a Philosopher

Author: Charles Babbage

Release date: July 18, 2018 [eBook #57532]
                Most recently updated: November 9, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team and
        RichardW at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A PHILOSOPHER ***




Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team and
RichardW at http://www.pgdp.net









PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A PHILOSOPHER, by Charles Babbage




[Illustration:

 _B. H. Babbage, del._

Impression from a woodcut of a small portion of Mr. Babbage’s
Difference Engine No. 1, the property of Government, at present
deposited in the Museum at South Kensington.

 It was commenced 1823.
 This portion put together 1833.
 The construction abandoned 1842.
 This plate was printed June, 1853.
 This portion was in the Exhibition 1862.]




 PASSAGES

 FROM

 THE LIFE OF A PHILOSOPHER.

 BY

 CHARLES BABBAGE, ESQ., M.A.,
 F.R.S., F.R.S.E., F.R.A.S., F. STAT. S., HON. M.R.I.A., M.C.P.S.,
 COMMANDER OF THE ITALIAN ORDER OF ST. MAURICE AND ST. LAZARUS,
 INST. IMP. (ACAD. MORAL.) PARIS CORR., ACAD. AMER. ART. ET SC. BOSTON,
 REG. ŒCON. BORUSS., PHYS. HIST. NAT. GENEV., ACAD. REG. MONAC., HAFN.,
 MASSIL., ET DIVION., SOCIUS. ACAD. IMP. ET REG. PETROP., NEAP., BRUX.,
 PATAV., GEORG. FLOREN, LYNCEI ROM., MUT., PHILOMATH. PARIS, SOC. CORR.,
 ETC.


 “I’m a philosopher. Confound them all—
 Birds, beasts, and men; but no, not womankind.”—_Don Juan._

 “I now gave my mind to philosophy: the great object of my ambition
 was to make out a complete system of the universe, including and
 comprehending the origin, causes, consequences, and termination of all
 things. Instead of countenance, encouragement, and applause, which
 I should have received from every one who has the true dignity of
 an oyster at heart, I was exposed to calumny and misrepresentation.
 While engaged in my great work on the universe, some even went
 so far as to accuse me of infidelity;—such is the malignity of
 oysters.”—_“Autobiography of an Oyster” deciphered by the aid of
 photography in the shell of a philosopher of that race,—recently
 scolloped._


 LONDON:

 LONGMAN, GREEN, LONGMAN, ROBERTS, & GREEN.

 1864.

 [_The right of Translation is reserved._]




DEDICATION.

TO VICTOR EMMANUEL II., KING OF ITALY.


SIRE,

In dedicating this volume to your Majesty, I am also doing an act of
justice to the memory of your illustrious father.

In 1840, the King, Charles Albert, invited the learned of Italy to
assemble in his capital. At the request of her most gifted Analyst, I
brought with me the drawings and explanations of the Analytical Engine.
These were thoroughly examined and their truth acknowledged by Italy’s
choicest sons.

To the King, your father, I am indebted for the first public and
official acknowledgment of this invention.

I am happy in thus expressing my deep sense of that obligation to his
son, the Sovereign of united Italy, the country of Archimedes and of
Galileo.

 I am, Sire,
 With the highest respect,
 Your Majesty’s faithful Servant,

 CHARLES BABBAGE.




PREFACE.


Some men write their lives to save themselves from _ennui_, careless of
the amount they inflict on their readers.

Others write their personal history, lest some kind friend should
survive them, and, in showing off his own talent, unwittingly show them
up.

Others, again, write their own life from a different motive—from fear
that the vampires of literature might make it their prey.

I have frequently had applications to write my life, both from my
countrymen and from foreigners. Some caterers for the public offered
to pay me for it. Others required that I should pay them for its
insertion; others offered to insert it without charge. One proposed to
give me a quarter of a column gratis, and as many additional lines of
eloge as I chose to write and pay for at ten-pence per line. To many of
these I sent a list of my works, with the remark that they formed the
best life of an author; but nobody cared to insert them.

I have no desire to write my own biography, as long as I have strength
and means to do better work.

The remarkable circumstances attending those Calculating Machines,
on which I have spent so large a portion of my life, make me wish
to place on record some account of their past history. As, however,
such a work would be utterly uninteresting to the greater part of my
countrymen, I thought it might be rendered less unpalatable by relating
some of my experience amongst various classes of society, widely
differing from each other, in which I have occasionally mixed.

This volume does not aspire to the name of an autobiography. It relates
a variety of isolated circumstances in which I have taken part—some
of them arranged in the order of time, and others grouped together in
separate chapters, from similarity of subject.

The selection has been made in some cases from the importance of the
matter. In others, from the celebrity of the persons concerned; whilst
several of them furnish interesting illustrations of human character.




CONTENTS.


                        I. • My Ancestors • 1

                          II. • Childhood • 7

                          III. • Boyhood • 17

                         IV. • Cambridge • 25

            V. • Difference Engine No. 1 • 41

   VI. • Statement relative to the Difference
  Engine, drawn up by the late Sir H. Nicolas
                from the Author’s Papers • 68

          VII. • Difference Engine No. 2 • 97

       VIII. • Of the Analytical Engine • 112

       IX. • Of the Mechanical Notation • 142

            X. • The Exhibition of 1862 • 147

          XI. • The late Prince Consort • 168

          XII. • Recollections of the Duke of
                             Wellington • 173

    XIII. • Recollections of Wollaston, Davy,
                             and Rogers • 186

   XIV. • Recollections of Laplace, Biot, and
                               Humboldt • 195

              XV. • Experience by Water • 205

              XVI. • Experience by Fire • 213

     XVII. • Experience amongst Workmen • 228

 XVIII. • Picking Locks and Deciphering • 233

       XIX. • Experience in St. Giles’s • 242

            XX. • Theatrical Experience • 251

       XXI. • Electioneering Experience • 259

   XXII. • Scene from a New After-Piece • 276

          XXIII. • Experience at Courts • 292

           XXIV. • Experience at Courts • 298

                        XXV. • Railways • 313

               XXVI. • Street Nuisances • 337

                           XXVII. • Wit • 363

         XXVIII. • Hints for Travellers • 371

                       XXIX. • Miracles • 387

                        XXX. • Religion • 396

                       XXXI. • A Vision • 406

         XXXII. • Various Reminiscences • 421

      XXXIII. • The Author’s Contributions to
                        Human Knowledge • 430

  XXXIV. • The Author’s further Contributions
                     to Human Knowledge • 441

             XXXV. • Results of Science • 473

       XXXVI. • Agreeable Recollections • 482

                               Appendix • 487




PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A PHILOSOPHER.




CHAPTER I.

MY ANCESTORS.


 Traced his descent, through ages dark,
 From cats that caterwauled in Noah’s ark.

 SALMAGUNDI, 4to, 1793.

 Value of a celebrated Name — My Ancestors — Their Ante-Mosaic origin
 — Flint-workers — Tool-makers — Not descended from Cain — Ought a
 Philosopher to avow it if he were? — Probability of Descent from Tubal
 Cain — Argument in favour, he worked in Iron — On the other side, he
 invented Organs — Possible origin of my Name — Family History in very
 recent times.

What is there in a name? It is merely an empty basket, until you put
something into it. My earliest visit to the Continent taught me the
value of such a basket, filled with the name of my venerable friend
the first Herschel, ere yet my younger friend his son, had adorned
his distinguished patronymic with the additional laurels of his own
well-earned fame.

The inheritance of a celebrated name is not, however, without its
disadvantages. This truth I never found more fully appreciated, nor
more admirably expressed, than in a conversation with the son of
Filangieri, the author of the {2} celebrated Treatise on Legislation,
with whom I became acquainted at Naples, and in whose company I visited
several of the most interesting institutions of that capital.

In the course of one of our drives, I alluded to the advantages of
inheriting a distinguished name, as in the case of the second Herschel.
His remark was, “For my own part, I think it a great disadvantage. Such
a man must feel in the position of one inheriting a vast estate, so
deeply mortgaged that he can never hope, by any efforts of his own, to
redeem it.”

Without reverting to the philosophic, but unromantic, views of our
origin taken by Darwin, I shall pass over the long history of our
progress from a monad up to man, and commence tracing my ancestry as
the world generally do: namely, as soon as there is the slightest
ground for conjecture. Although I have contended for the Mosaic date
of the creation of man as long as I decently could, and have even
endeavoured to explain away[1] some of the facts relied upon to prove
man’s long anterior origin; yet I must admit that the continual
accumulation of evidence probably will, at last, compel me to
acknowledge that, in this single instance, the writings of Moses may
have been misapprehended.

     [1] On the remains of human art, mixed with the bones of extinct
     races of animals. Proceedings of the Royal Society, 26th May, 1859.

〈DESCENT FROM FLINT-WORKERS.〉

Let us, therefore, take for granted that man and certain extinct races
of animals lived together, thousands of years before Adam. We find, at
that period, a race who formed knives, and hammers, and arrow-heads
out of flint. Now, considering my own inveterate habit of contriving
_tools_, it is more probable that I should derive my passion by
hereditary transmission from these original tool-makers, than from any
other inferior race existing at that period. {3}

Many years ago I met a very agreeable party at Mr. Rogers’ table.
Somebody introduced the subject of ancestry. I remarked that most
people are reluctant to acknowledge as their father or grandfather,
any person who had committed a dishonest action or a crime. But that
no one ever scrupled to be proud of a remote ancestor, even though he
might have been a thief or a murderer. Various remarks were made, and
reasons assigned, for this tendency of the educated mind. I then turned
to my next neighbour, Sir Robert H. Inglis, and asked him what he would
do, supposing he possessed undoubted documents, that he was lineally
descended from Cain.

Sir Robert said he was at that moment proposing to himself the very
same question. After some consideration, he said he should burn them;
and then inquired what I should do in the same circumstances. My reply
was, that I should preserve them: but simply because I thought the
preservation of any _fact_ might ultimately be useful.

〈NOT THROUGH CAIN.〉

I possess no evidence that I am descended from Cain. If any herald
suppose that there may be such a presumption, I think it must arise
from his confounding Cain with Tubal Cain, who was a great worker in
iron. Still, however he might argue that, the probabilities are in
favour of his opinion: for I, too, work in iron. But a friend of mine,
to whose kind criticisms I am much indebted, suggests that as Tubal
Cain invented the _Organ_, this probability is opposed to the former
one.

The next step in my pedigree is to determine whence the origin of my
modern family name.

Some have supposed it to be derived from the cry of sheep. If so, that
would point to a descent from the Shepherd Kings. Others have supposed
it is derived from the name of a place called Bab or Babb, as we have,
in the West of England, Bab {4} Tor, Babbacombe, &c. But this is
evidently erroneous; for, when a people took possession of a desert
country, its various localities could possess no names; consequently,
the colonists could not take names from the country to which they
migrated, but would very naturally give their own names to the several
lands they appropriated: “_mais revenons à nos moutons_.”

How my blood was transmitted to me through more modern races, is quite
immaterial, seeing the admitted antiquity of the flint-workers.

〈SAD OMISSION.〉

In recent times, that is, since the Conquest, my knowledge of the
history of my family is limited by the unfortunate omission of my name
from the roll of William’s followers. Those who are curious about the
subject, and are idlers, may, if they think it worth while, search all
the parish registers in the West of England and elsewhere.

The light I can throw upon it is not great, and rests on a few
documents, and on family tradition. During the past four generations I
have no surviving collateral relatives of my own name.

The name of Babbage is not uncommon in the West of England. One day
during my boyhood, I observed it over a small grocer’s shop, whilst
riding through the town of Chudley. I dismounted, went into the shop,
purchased some figs, and found a very old man of whom I made inquiry
as to his family. He had not a good memory himself, but his wife told
me that his name was Babb when she married him, and that it was only
during the last twenty years he had adopted the name of Babbage, which,
the old man thought, sounded better. Of course I told his wife that
I entirely agreed with her husband, and thought him a very sensible
fellow.

The craft most frequently practised by my ancestors seems {5} to
have been that of a goldsmith, although several are believed to have
practised less dignified trades.

In the time of Henry the Eighth one of my ancestors, together with a
hundred men, were taken prisoners at the siege of Calais.

When William the Third landed in Torbay, another ancestor of mine,
a yeoman possessing some small estate, undertook to distribute his
proclamations. For this bit of high treason he was rewarded with a
silver medal, which I well remember seeing, when I was a boy. It had
descended to a very venerable and truthful old lady, an unmarried aunt,
the historian of our family, on whose authority the identity of the
medal I saw with that given by King William must rest.

Another ancestor married one of two daughters, the only children of a
wealthy physician, Dr. Burthogge, an intimate friend and correspondent
of John Locke.

〈A WILD ANCESTOR.〉

Somewhere about 1700 a member of my family, one Richard Babbage, who
appears to have been a very wild fellow, having tried his hand at
various trades, and given them all up, offended a wealthy relative.

To punish this idleness, his relative entailed all his large estates
upon eleven different people, after whom he gave it to this Richard
Babbage, who, had there been no entail, would have taken them as
heir-at-law.

Ten of these lives had dropped, and the eleventh was in a consumption,
when Richard Babbage took it into his head to go off to America with
Bamfylde Moore Carew, the King of the Beggars.

The last only of the eleven lives existed when he embarked, and that
life expired within twelve months after Richard Babbage sailed. The
estates remained in possession of the representatives of the eleventh
in the entail. {6}

If it could have been proved that Richard Babbage had survived twelve
months after his voyage to America, these estates would have remained
in my own branch of the family.

I possess a letter from Richard Babbage, dated on board the ship in
which he sailed for America.

〈ACT OF PARLIAMENT.〉

In the year 1773 it became necessary to sell a portion of this
property, for the purpose of building a church at Ashbrenton. A private
Act of Parliament was passed for that purpose, in which the rights of
the true heir were reserved.

{7}




CHAPTER II.

CHILDHOOD.


 “The Prince of Darkness is a gentleman.”—_Hamlet._

 Early Passion for inquiry and inquisition into Toys — Lost on London
 Bridge — Supposed value of the young Philosopher — Found again
 — Strange Coincidence in after-years — Poisoned — Frightened a
 Schoolfellow by a Ghost — Frightened himself by trying to raise the
 Devil — Effect of Want of Occupation for the Mind — Treasure-trove —
 Death and Non-appearance of a Schoolfellow.

From my earliest years I had a great desire to inquire into the causes
of all those little things and events which astonish the childish mind.
At a later period I commenced the still more important inquiry into
those laws of thought and those aids which assist the human mind in
passing from received knowledge to that other knowledge then unknown to
our race. I now think it fit to record some of those views to which,
at various periods of my life, my reasoning has led me. Truth only has
been the object of my search, and I am not conscious of ever having
turned aside in my inquiries from any fear of the conclusions to which
they might lead.

As it may be interesting to some of those who will hereafter read these
lines, I shall briefly mention a few events of my earliest, and even
of my childish years. My parents being born at a certain period of
history, and in a certain latitude and longitude, of course followed
the religion {8} of their country. They brought me up in the Protestant
form of the Christian faith. My excellent mother taught me the usual
forms of my daily and nightly prayer; and neither in my father nor
my mother was there any mixture of bigotry and intolerance on the
one hand, nor on the other of that unbecoming and familiar mode of
addressing the Almighty which afterwards so much disgusted me in my
youthful years.

My invariable question on receiving any new toy, was “Mamma, what is
inside of it?” Until this information was obtained those around me had
no repose, and the toy itself, I have been told, was generally broken
open if the answer did not satisfy my own little ideas of the “fitness
of things.”


_Earliest Recollections._

Two events which impressed themselves forcibly on my memory happened, I
think, previously to my eighth year.

〈THE YOUNG PHILOSOPHER LOST.〉

When about five years old, I was walking with my nurse, who had in
her arms an infant brother of mine, across London Bridge, holding, as
I thought, by her apron. I was looking at the ships in the river. On
turning round to speak to her, I found that my nurse was not there, and
that I was alone upon London Bridge. My mother had always impressed
upon me the necessity of great caution in passing any street-crossing:
I went on, therefore, quietly until I reached Tooley Street, where
I remained watching the passing vehicles, in order to find a safe
opportunity of crossing that very busy street.

〈THE CRIER OFFERS A REWARD.〉

In the mean time the nurse, having lost one of her charges, had gone
to the crier, who proceeded immediately to call, by the ringing of his
bell, the attention of the public to the fact that a young philosopher
was lost, and to the still more important fact that five shillings
would be the reward of his fortunate discoverer. I well remember
sitting on the steps of {9} the door of the linendraper’s shop on the
opposite corner of Tooley Street, when the gold-laced crier was making
proclamation of my loss; but I was too much occupied with eating some
pears to attend to what he was saying.

The fact was, that one of the men in the linendraper’s shop, observing
a little child by itself, went over to it, and asked what it wanted.
Finding that it had lost its nurse, he brought it across the street,
gave it some pears, and placed it on the steps at the door: having
asked my name, the shopkeeper found it to be that of one of his own
customers. He accordingly sent off a messenger, who announced to my
mother the finding of young Pickle before she was aware of his loss.

Those who delight in observing coincidences may perhaps account for
the following singular one. Several years ago when the houses in
Tooley Street were being pulled down, I believe to make room for the
new railway terminus, I happened to pass along the very spot on which
I had been lost in my infancy. A slate of the largest size, called
a Duchess,[2] was thrown from the roof of one of the houses, and
penetrated into the earth close to my feet.

     [2] There exists an aristocracy even amongst slates, perhaps from
     their occupying the most _elevated_ position in every house. Small
     ones are called Ladies, a larger size Countesses, and the biggest
     of all are Duchesses.

The other event, which I believe happened some time after the one
just related, is as follows. I give it from memory, as I have always
repeated it.

〈YOUNG PHILOSOPHER POISONED.〉

I was walking with my nurse and my brother in a public garden, called
Montpelier Gardens, in Walworth. On returning through the private road
leading to the gardens, I gathered and swallowed some dark berries very
like black currants:—these were poisonous. {10}

On my return home, I recollect being placed between my father’s knees,
and his giving me a glass of castor oil, which I took from his hand.

My father at that time possessed a collection of pictures. He sat on
a chair on the right hand side of the chimney-piece in the breakfast
room, under a fine picture of our Saviour taken down from the cross.
On the opposite wall was a still-celebrated “Interior of Antwerp
Cathedral.”

In after-life I several times mentioned the subject both to my father
and to my mother; but neither of them had the slightest recollection of
the matter.

Having suffered in health at the age of five years, and again at that
of ten by violent fevers, from which I was with difficulty saved, I was
sent into Devonshire and placed under the care of a clergyman (who kept
a school at Alphington, near Exeter), with instructions to attend to my
health; but, not to press too much knowledge upon me: a mission which
he faithfully accomplished. Perhaps great idleness may have led to some
of my childish reasonings.

Relations of ghost stories often circulate amongst children, and also
of visitations from the devil in a _personal_ form. Of course I shared
the belief of my comrades, but still had some doubts of the existence
of these personages, although I greatly feared their appearance. Once,
in conjunction with a companion, I frightened another boy, bigger than
myself, with some pretended ghost; how prepared or how represented
by natural objects I do not now remember: I believe it was by the
accidental passing shadows of some external objects upon the walls of
our common bedroom.

〈DELUDES A BOY WITH A GHOST.〉

The effect of this on my playfellow was painful; he was much frightened
for several days; and it naturally occurred to me, after some time,
that as I had deluded him with ghosts, {11} I might myself have been
deluded by older persons, and that, after all, it might be a doubtful
point whether ghost or devil ever really existed. I gathered all the
information I could on the subject from the other boys, and was soon
informed that there was a peculiar process by which the devil might be
raised and become personally visible. I carefully collected from the
traditions of different boys the visible forms in which the Prince of
Darkness had been recorded to have appeared. Amongst them were—

 A rabbit,
 An owl,
 A black cat, very frequently,
 A raven,
 A man with a cloven foot, also frequent.

After long thinking over the subject, although checked by a belief that
the inquiry was wicked, my curiosity at length over-balanced my fears,
and I resolved to attempt to raise the devil. Naughty people, I was
told, had made written compacts with the devil, and had signed them
with their names written in their own blood. These had become very rich
and great men during their life, a fact which might be well known. But,
after death, they were described as having suffered and continuing to
suffer physical torments throughout eternity, another fact which, to my
uninstructed mind, it seemed difficult to prove.

As I only desired an interview with the gentleman in black simply to
convince my senses of his existence, I declined adopting the legal
forms of a bond, and preferred one more resembling that of leaving a
visiting card, when, if not at home, I might expect the satisfaction of
a return of the visit by the devil in person. {12}

〈TRIES TO RAISE THE DEVIL.〉

Accordingly, having selected a promising locality, I went one evening
towards dusk up into a deserted garret. Having closed the door, and
I believe opened the window, I proceeded to cut my finger and draw a
circle on the floor with the blood which flowed from the incision.

I then placed myself in the centre of the circle, and either said or
read the Lord’s Prayer backwards. This I accomplished at first with
some trepidation and in great fear towards the close of the scene. I
then stood still in the centre of that magic and superstitious circle,
looking with intense anxiety in all directions, especially at the
window and at the chimney. Fortunately for myself, and for the reader
also, if he is interested in this narrative, no owl or black cat or
unlucky raven came into the room.

In either case my then weakened frame might have expiated this foolish
experiment by its own extinction, or by the alienation of that too
curious spirit which controlled its feeble powers.

〈EXPERIMENTAL RELIGION.〉

After waiting some time for my expected but dreaded visitor, I, in
some degree, recovered my self-possession, and leaving the circle
of my incantation, I gradually opened the door and gently closing
it, descended the stairs, at first slowly, and by degrees much more
quickly. I then rejoined my companions, but said nothing whatever of my
recent attempt. After supper the boys retired to bed. When we were in
bed and the candle removed, I proceeded as usual to repeat my prayers
silently to myself. After the few first sentences of the Lord’s Prayer,
I found that I had forgotten a sentence, and could not go on to the
conclusion. This alarmed me very much, and having repeated another
prayer or hymn, I remained long awake, and very unhappy. I thought that
this forgetfulness was a punishment inflicted {13} upon me by the
Almighty, and that I was a wicked little boy for having attempted to
satisfy myself about the existence of a devil. The next night my memory
was more faithful, and my prayers went on as usual. Still, however, I
was unhappy, and continued to brood over the inquiry. My uninstructed
faculties led me from doubts of the existence of a devil to doubts of
the book and the religion which asserted him to be a living being.
My sense of justice (whether it be innate or acquired) led me to
believe that it was impossible that an almighty and all-merciful God
could punish me, a poor little boy, with eternal torments because I
had anxiously taken the only means I knew of to verify the truth or
falsehood of the religion I had been taught. I thought over these
things for a long time, and, in my own childish mind, wished and prayed
that God would tell me what was true. After long meditation, I resolved
to make an experiment to settle the question. I thought, if it was
really of such immense importance to me here and hereafter to believe
rightly, that the Almighty would not consign me to eternal misery
because, after trying all means that I could devise, I was unable to
know the truth. I took an odd mode of making the experiment; I resolved
that at a certain hour of a certain day I would go to a certain room
in the house, and that if I found the door open, I would believe the
Bible; but that if it were closed, I should conclude that it was not
true. I remember well that the observation was made, but I have no
recollection as to the state of the door. I presume it was found open
from the circumstance that, for many years after, I was no longer
troubled by doubts, and indeed went through the usual religious forms
with very little thought about their origin.

〈DISCOVERY OF GOLD.〉

At length, as time went on, my bodily health was restored {14} by my
native air: my mind, however, receiving but little instruction, began,
I imagine, to prey upon itself—such at least I infer to have been the
case from the following circumstance. One day, when uninterested in
the sports of my little companions, I had retired into the shrubbery
and was leaning my head, supported by my left arm, upon the lower
branch of a thorn-tree. Listless and unoccupied, I _imagined_ I had a
head-ache. After a time I perceived, lying on the ground just under
me, a small bright bit of metal. I instantly seized the precious
discovery, and turning it over, examined both sides. I immediately
concluded that I had discovered some valuable treasure, and running
away to my deserted companions, showed them my golden coin. The little
company became greatly excited, and declared that it must be gold,
and that it was a piece of money of great value. We ran off to get
the opinion of the usher; but whether he partook of the delusion, or
we acquired our knowledge from the higher authority of the master, I
know not. I only recollect the entire dissipation of my head-ache, and
then my ultimate great disappointment when it was pronounced, upon the
undoubted authority of the village doctor, that the square piece of
brass I had found was a half-dram weight which had escaped from the
box of a pair of medical scales. This little incident had an important
effect upon my after-life. I reflected upon the extraordinary fact,
that my head-ache had been entirely cured by the discovery of the
piece of brass. Although I may not have put into words the principle,
_that occupation of the mind is such a source of pleasure that it can
relieve even the pain of a head-ache_; yet I am sure it practically
gave an additional stimulus to me in many a difficult inquiry. Some
few years after, when suffering under a form of tooth-ache, not acute
though tediously {15} wearing, I often had recourse to a volume of Don
Quixote, and still more frequently to one of Robinson Crusoe. Although
at first it required a painful effort of attention, yet it almost
always happened, after a time, that I had forgotten the moderate pain
in the overpowering interest of the novel.

〈COMPACT TO APPEAR AFTER DEATH.〉

My most intimate companion and friend was a boy named Dacres, the son
of Admiral Richard Dacres. We had often talked over such questions as
those I have mentioned in this chapter, and we had made an agreement
that whichever died first should, if possible, appear to the other
after death, in order to satisfy the survivor about their solution.

After a year or two my young friend entered the navy, but we kept up
our friendship, and when he was ashore I saw him frequently. He was
in a ship of eighty guns at the passage of the Dardanelles, under the
command of Sir Thomas Duckworth. Ultimately he was sent home in charge
of a prize-ship, in which he suffered the severest hardships during a
long and tempestuous voyage, and then died of consumption.

I saw him a few days before his death, at the age of about eighteen.
We talked of former times, but neither of us mentioned the compact. I
believe it occurred to his mind: it was certainly strongly present to
my own.

〈DID NOT APPEAR.〉

He died a few days after. On the evening of that day I retired to my
own room, which was partially detached from the house by an intervening
conservatory. I sat up until after midnight, endeavouring to read,
but found it impossible to fix my attention on any subject, except
the overpowering feeling of curiosity, which absorbed my mind. I then
undressed and went into bed; but sleep was entirely banished. I had
previously carefully examined whether any cat, bird, or living animal
might be accidentally concealed in my room, {16} and I had studied the
forms of the furniture lest they should in the darkness mislead me.

I passed a night of perfect sleeplessness. The distant clock and a
faithful dog, just outside my own door, produced the only sounds which
disturbed the intense silence of that anxious night.

{17}




CHAPTER III.

BOYHOOD.


 Taken to an Exhibition of Mechanism — Silver Ladies — School near
 London — Unjustly punished — Injurious Effect — Ward’s Young
 Mathematician’s Guide — Got up in the Night to Study — Frederick
 Marryat interrupts — Treaty of Peace — Found out — Strange Effect of
 Treacle and Cognac on Boys — Taught to write Sermons under the Rev.
 Charles Simeon.

During my boyhood my mother took me to several exhibitions of
machinery. I well remember one of them in Hanover Square, by a man
who called himself Merlin. I was so greatly interested in it, that
the Exhibitor remarked the circumstance, and after explaining some of
the objects to which the public had access, proposed to my mother to
take me up to his workshop, where I should see still more wonderful
automata. We accordingly ascended to the attic. There were two
uncovered female figures of silver, about twelve inches high.

One of these walked or rather glided along a space of about four feet,
when she turned round and went back to her original place. She used an
eye-glass occasionally, and bowed frequently, as if recognizing her
acquaintances. The motions of her limbs were singularly graceful.

The other silver figure was an admirable _danseuse_, with a bird
on the fore finger of her right hand, which wagged its tail,
flapped its wings, and opened its beak. This lady attitudinized in
a most fascinating manner. Her eyes were full of imagination, and
irresistible. {18}

These silver figures were the chef-d’œuvres of the artist: they had
cost him years of unwearied labour, and were not even then finished.

After I left Devonshire I was placed at a school in the neighbourhood
of London, in which there were about thirty boys.

〈UNJUST PUNISHMENT.〉

My first experience was unfortunate, and probably gave an unfavourable
turn to my whole career during my residence of three years.

After I had been at school a few weeks, I went with one of my
companions into the play-ground in the dusk of the evening. We heard
a noise, as of people talking in an orchard at some distance, which
belonged to our master. As the orchard had recently been robbed, we
thought that thieves were again at work. We accordingly climbed over
the boundary wall, ran across the field, and saw in the orchard beyond
a couple of fellows evidently running away. We pursued as fast as our
legs could carry us, and just got up to the supposed thieves at the
ditch on the opposite side of the orchard.

A roar of laughter then greeted us from two of our own companions, who
had entered the orchard for the purpose of getting some manure for
their flowers out of a rotten mulberry-tree. These boys were aware of
our mistake, and had humoured it.

We now returned all together towards the play-ground, when we met our
master, who immediately pronounced that we were each fined one shilling
for being out of bounds. We two boys who had gone out of bounds to
protect our master’s property, and who if thieves had really been there
would probably have been half-killed by them, attempted to remonstrate
and explain the case; but all {19} remonstrance was vain, and we were
accordingly fined. I never forgot that injustice.

The school-room adjoined the house, but was not directly connected
with it. It contained a library of about three hundred volumes on
various subjects, generally very well selected; it also contained one
or two works on subjects which do not usually attract at that period of
life. I derived much advantage from this library; and I now mention it
because I think it of great importance that a library should exist in
every school-room.

〈NIGHT WORK.〉

Amongst the books was a treatise on Algebra, called “Ward’s Young
Mathematician’s Guide.” I was always partial to my arithmetical
lessons, but this book attracted my particular attention. After I had
been at this school for about a twelvemonth, I proposed to one of
my school-fellows, who was of a studious habit, that we should get
up every morning at three o’clock, light a fire in the school-room,
and work until five or half-past five. We accomplished this pretty
regularly for several months. Our plan had, however, become partially
known to a few of our companions. One of these, a tall boy, bigger than
ourselves, having heard of it, asked me to allow him to get up with us,
urging that his sole object was to study, and that it would be of great
importance to him in after-life. I had the cruelty to refuse this very
reasonable request. The subject has often recurred to my memory, but
never without regret.

〈RIVAL COMPETITORS.〉

Another of my young companions, Frederick Marryat,[3] made the same
request, but not with the same motive. I told him we got up in order to
work; that he would only play, and that we should then be found out.
After some time, having exhausted all his arguments, Marryat told me he
was {20} determined to get up, and would do it whether I liked it or
not.

     [3] Afterwards Captain Marryat.

Marryat slept in the same room as myself: it contained five beds. Our
room opened upon a landing, and its door was exactly opposite that of
the master. A flight of stairs led up to a passage just over the room
in which the master and mistress slept. Passing along this passage,
another flight of stairs led down, on the other side of the master’s
bed-room, to another landing, from which another flight of stairs led
down to the external door of the house, leading by a long passage to
the school-room.

Through this devious course I had cautiously threaded my way, calling
up my companion in his room at the top of the last flight of stairs,
almost every night for several months.

One night on trying to open the door of my own bed-room, I found
Marryat’s bed projecting a little before the door, so that I could
not open it. I perceived that this was done purposely, in order that
I might awaken him. I therefore cautiously, and by degrees, pushed
his bed back without awaking him, and went as usual to my work. This
occurred two or three nights successively.

One night, however, I found a piece of pack-thread tied to the door
lock, which I traced to Marryat’s bed, and concluded it was tied to his
arm or hand. I merely untied the cord from the lock, and passed on.

A few nights after I found it impossible to untie the cord, so I cut
it with my pocket-knife. The cord then became thicker and thicker for
several nights, but still my pen-knife did its work.

〈VARIOUS STRATAGEMS.〉

One night I found a small chain fixed to the lock, and passing thence
into Marryat’s bed. This defeated my efforts for that night, and I
retired to my own bed. The next night {21} I was provided with a
pair of plyers, and unbent one of the links, leaving the two portions
attached to Marryat’s arm and to the lock of the door. This occurred
several times, varying by stouter chains, and by having a padlock which
I could not pick in the dark.

At last one morning I found a chain too strong for the tools I
possessed; so I retired to my own bed, defeated. The next night,
however, I provided myself with a ball of packthread. As soon as I
heard by his breathing that Marryat was asleep, I crept over to the
door, drew one end of my ball of packthread through a link of the
too-powerful chain, and bringing it back with me to bed, gave it a
sudden jerk by pulling both ends of the packthread passing through the
link of the chain.

Marryat jumped up, put out his hand to the door, found his chain all
right, and then lay down. As soon as he was asleep again, I repeated
the operation. Having awakened him for the third time, I let go one end
of the string, and drew it back by the other, so that he was unable at
daylight to detect the cause.

At last, however, I found it expedient to enter into a treaty of peace,
the basis of which was that I should allow Marryat to join the night
party; but that nobody else should be admitted. This continued for
a short time; but, one by one, three or four other boys, friends of
Marryat, joined our party, and, as I had anticipated, no work was done.
We all got to play; we let off fire-works in the play-ground, and were
of course discovered.

〈FOUND OUT.〉

Our master read us a very grave lecture at breakfast upon the
impropriety of this irregular system of turning night into day, and
pointed out its injurious effects upon the health. This, he said,
was so remarkable that he could distinguish by {22} their pallid
countenances those who had taken part in it. Now he certainly did point
out every boy who had been up on the night we were detected. But it
appeared to me very odd that the same means of judging had not enabled
him long before to discover the two boys who had for several months
habitually practised this system of turning night into day.

Another of our pranks never received its solution in our master’s mind;
indeed I myself scarcely knew its early history. Somehow or other, a
Russian young gentleman, who was a parlour-boarder, had I believe,
expatiated to Marryat on the virtues of Cognac.

One evening my friend came to me with a quart bottle of what he
called excellent stuff. A council was held amongst a few of us boys
to decide how we should dispose of this treasure. I did not myself
much admire the liquid, but suggested that it might be very good when
mixed up with a lot of treacle. This thought was unanimously adopted,
and a subscription made to purchase the treacle. Having no vessel
sufficiently large to hold the intended mixture, I proposed to take one
of our garden-pots, stopping up the hole in its bottom with a cork.

A good big earthen vessel, thus extemporised, was then filled with
this wonderful mixture. A spoon or two, an oyster-shell, and various
other contrivances delivered it to its numerous consumers, and all the
boys got a greater or less share, according to their taste for this
extraordinary liqueur.

The feast was over, the garden-pot was restored to its owner, and the
treacled lips of the boys had been wiped with their handkerchiefs or on
their coat-sleeves, when the bell announced that it was prayer-time. We
all knelt in silence at our respective desks. As soon as the prayers
were over, one of the oddest scenes occurred. {23}

〈EFFECT OF COGNAC.〉

Many boys rose up from their knees—but some fell down again. Some
turned round several times, and then fell. Some turned round so often
that they resembled spinning dervishes. Others were only more stupid
than usual; some complained of being sick; many were very sleepy;
others were sound asleep, and had to be carried to bed; some talked
fast and heroically, two attempted psalmody, but none listened.

All investigation at the time was useless: we were sent off to bed as
quickly as possible. It was only known that Count Cognac had married
the sweet Miss Treacle, whom all the boys knew and loved, and who
lodged at the grocer’s, in the neighbouring village. But I believe
neither the pedigree of the bridegroom nor his domicile were ever
discovered. It is probable that he was of French origin, and dwelt in a
cellar.

After I left this school I was for a few years under the care of an
excellent clergyman in the neighbourhood of Cambridge. There were
only six boys; but I fear I did not derive from it all the advantage
that I might have done. I came into frequent contact with the Rev.
Charles Simeon, and with many of his enthusiastic disciples. Every
Sunday I had to write from memory an abstract of the sermon he preached
in our village. Even at that period of my life I had a taste for
generalization. Accordingly, having generalized some of Mr. Simeon’s
sermons up to a kind of skeleton form, I tried, by way of experiment,
to fill up such a form in a sermon of my own composing from the text
of “Alexander the coppersmith hath done us much harm.” As well as I
remember, there were in my sermon some queer deductions from this
text; but then they fulfilled all the usual conditions of our sermons:
so thought also two of my companions to whom I communicated _in
confidence_ this new manufacture. {24}

〈COMPOSES SERMONS.〉

By some unexplained circumstance my sermon relating to copper being
isomorphous with Simeon’s own productions, got by substitution into
the hands of our master as the recollections of one of the other boys.
Thereupon arose an awful explosion which I decline to paint.

I did, however, learn something at this school, for I observed a
striking illustration of the Economy of Manufactures. Mr. Simeon had
the cure of a very wicked parish in Cambridge, whilst my instructor
held that of a tolerably decent country village. If each minister had
stuck to the instruction of his own parish, it would have necessitated
the manufacture of four sermons per week, whilst, by this beneficial
interchange of duties, only two were required.

Each congregation enjoyed also another advantage from this
arrangement—the advantage of variety, which, when moderately indulged
in, excites the appetite.

{25}




CHAPTER IV.

CAMBRIDGE.


 Universal Language — Purchase Lacroix’s Quarto Work on the Integral
 Calculus — Disappointment on getting no explanation of my Mathematical
 Difficulties — Origin of the Analytical Society — The Ghost Club
 — Chess — Sixpenny Whist and Guinea Whist — Boating — Chemistry —
 Elected Lucasian Professor of Mathematics in 1828.

My father, with a view of acquiring some information which might be of
use to me at Cambridge, had consulted a tutor of one of the colleges,
who was passing his long vacation at the neighbouring watering-place,
Teignmouth. He dined with us frequently. The advice of the Rev. Doctor
was quite sound, but very limited. It might be summed up in one short
sentence: “Advise your son not to purchase his wine in Cambridge.”

Previously to my entrance at Trinity College, Cambridge, I resided for
a time at Totnes, under the guidance of an Oxford tutor, who undertook
to superintend my classical studies only.

During my residence at this place I accidentally heard, for the first
time, of an idea of forming a universal language. I was much fascinated
by it, and, soon after, proceeded to write a kind of grammar, and then
to devise a dictionary. Some trace of the former, I think, I still
possess: but I was stopped in my idea of making a universal dictionary
by the apparent impossibility of arranging signs in any consecutive
{26} order, so as to find, as in a dictionary, the meaning of each
when wanted. It was only after I had been some time at Cambridge that
I became acquainted with the work of “Bishop Wilkins on Universal
Language.”

Being passionately fond of algebra, I had instructed myself by means
of Ward’s “Young Mathematician’s Guide,” which had casually fallen
into my hands at school. I now employed all my leisure in studying
such mathematical works as accident brought to my knowledge. Amongst
these were Humphrey Ditton’s “Fluxions,” of which I could make nothing;
Madame Agnesi’s “Analytical Institutions,” from which I acquired some
knowledge; Woodhouse’s “Principles of Analytical Calculation,” from
which I learned the notation of Leibnitz; and Lagrange’s “Théorie des
Fonctions.” I possessed also the Fluxions of Maclaurin and of Simpson.

Thus it happened that when I went to Cambridge I could work out such
questions as the very moderate amount of mathematics which I then
possessed admitted, with equal facility, in the dots of Newton, the
d’s of Leibnitz, or the dashes of Lagrange. I had, however, met with
many difficulties, and looked forward with intense delight to the
certainty of having them all removed on my arrival at Cambridge. I had
in my imagination formed a plan for the institution amongst my future
friends of a chess club, and also of another club for the discussion of
mathematical subjects.

〈PURCHASE THE WORK OF LACROIX.〉

In 1811, during the war, it was very difficult to procure foreign
books. I had heard of the great work of Lacroix, on the “Differential
and Integral Calculus,” which I longed to possess, and being
misinformed that its price was two guineas, I resolved to purchase it
in London on my passage to Cambridge. As soon as I arrived I went to
the French {27} bookseller, Dulau, and to my great surprise found that
the price of the book was seven guineas. After much thought I made
the costly purchase, went on immediately to Cambridge, saw my tutor,
Hudson, got lodgings, and then spent the greater part of the night in
turning over the pages of my newly-acquired purchase. After a few days,
I went to my public tutor Hudson, to ask the explanation of one of my
mathematical difficulties. He listened to my question, said it would
not be asked in the Senate House, and was of no sort of consequence,
and advised me to get up the earlier subjects of the university studies.

〈DIFFICULTIES NOT ANSWERED.〉

After some little while I went to ask the explanation of another
difficulty from one of the lecturers. He treated the question just
in the same way. I made a third effort to be enlightened about what
was really a doubtful question, and felt satisfied that the person I
addressed knew nothing of the matter, although he took some pains to
disguise his ignorance.

I thus acquired a distaste for the routine of the studies of the place,
and devoured the papers of Euler and other mathematicians, scattered
through innumerable volumes of the academies of Petersburgh, Berlin,
and Paris, which the libraries I had recourse to contained.

Under these circumstances it was not surprising that I should perceive
and be penetrated with the superior power of the notation of Leibnitz.

At an early period, probably at the commencement of the second year of
my residence at Cambridge, a friend of mine, Michael Slegg, of Trinity,
was taking wine with me, discussing mathematical subjects, to which he
also was enthusiastically attached. Hearing the chapel bell ring, he
took leave of me, promising to return for a cup of coffee. {28}

〈RESULT OF BIBLE SOCIETY.〉

At this period Cambridge was agitated by a fierce controversy.
Societies had been formed for printing and circulating the Bible.
One party proposed to circulate it with notes, in order to make it
intelligible; whilst the other scornfully rejected all explanations of
the word of God as profane attempts to mend that which was perfect.

The walls of the town were placarded with broadsides, and posters were
sent from house to house. One of the latter form of advertisement
was lying upon my table when Slegg left me. Taking up the paper, and
looking through it, I thought it, from its exaggerated tone, a good
subject for a parody.

I then drew up the sketch of a society to be instituted for translating
the small work of Lacroix on the Differential and Integral Lacroix. It
proposed that we should have periodical meetings for the propagation of
d’s; and consigned to perdition all who supported the heresy of dots.
It maintained that the work of Lacroix was so perfect that any comment
was unnecessary.

On Slegg’s return from chapel I put the parody into his hands. My
friend enjoyed the joke heartily, and at parting asked my permission to
show the parody to a mathematical friend of his, Mr. Bromhead.[4]

     [4] Afterwards Sir Edward Ffrench Bromhead, Bart., the author of
     an interesting paper in the Transactions of the Royal Society.

The next day Slegg called on me, and said that he had put the joke into
the hand of his friend, who, after laughing heartily, remarked that it
was too good a joke to be lost, and proposed seriously that we should
form a society for the cultivation of mathematics.

〈ANALYTICAL SOCIETY.〉

The next day Bromhead called on me. We talked the subject over, and
agreed to hold a meeting at his lodgings {29} for the purpose of
forming a society for the promotion of analysis.

At that meeting, besides the projectors, there were present Herschel,
Peacock, D’Arblay,[5] Ryan,[6] Robinson,[7] Frederick Maule,[8] and
several others. We constituted ourselves “The Analytical Society;”
hired a meeting-room, open daily; held meetings, read papers, and
discussed them. Of course we were much ridiculed by the Dons; and, not
being put down, it was darkly hinted that we were young infidels, and
that no good would come of us.

In the meantime we quietly pursued our course, and at last resolved to
publish a volume of our Transactions. Owing to the illness of one of
the number, and to various other circumstances, the volume which was
published was entirely contributed by Herschel and myself.

At last our work was printed, and it became necessary to decide upon
a title. Recalling the slight imputation which had been made upon our
faith, I suggested that the most appropriate title would be—

The Principles of pure D-ism in opposition to the Dot-age of the
University.[9]

     [5] The only son of Madame D’Arblay.

     [6] Now the Right Honourable Sir Edward Ryan.

     [7] The Rev. Dr. Robinson, Master of the Temple.

     [8] A younger brother of the late Mr. Justice Maule.

     [9] Leibnitz indicated fluxions by a _d_, Newton by a dot.

〈ELECTED LUCASIAN PROFESSOR.〉

In thus reviving this wicked pun, I ought at the same time to record
an instance of forgiveness unparalleled in history. Fourteen years
after, being then at Rome, I accidentally read in Galignani’s newspaper
the following paragraph, dated Cambridge:—“Yesterday the bells of St.
Mary rang on the election of Mr. Babbage as Lucasian Professor of
Mathematics.” {30}

If this event had happened during the lifetime of my father, it would
have been most gratifying to myself, because, whilst it would have
given him much pleasure, it would then also have afforded intense
delight to my mother.

I concluded that the next post would bring me the official confirmation
of this report, and after some consideration I sketched the draft of a
letter, in which I proposed to thank the University sincerely for the
honour they had done me, but to decline it.

This sketch of a letter was hardly dry when two of my intimate
friends, the Rev. Mr. Lunn and Mr. Beilby Thompson,[10] who resided
close to me in the Piazza del Populo, came over to congratulate me on
the appointment. I showed them my proposed reply, against which they
earnestly protested. Their first, and as they believed their strongest,
reason was that it would give so much pleasure to my mother. To this
I answered that my mother’s opinion of her son had been confirmed by
the reception he had met with in every foreign country he had visited,
and that this, in her estimation, would add but little to it. To their
next argument I had no satisfactory answer. It was that this election
could not have occurred unless some friends of mine in England had
taken active measures to promote it; that some of these might have been
personal friends, but that many others might have exerted themselves
entirely upon principle, and that it would be harsh to disappoint such
friends, and reject such a compliment.

     [10] Afterwards Lord Wenlock.

My own feelings were of a mixed nature. I saw the vast field that
the Difference Engine had opened out; for, before I left England in
the previous year, I had extended its mechanism to the tabulation of
functions having no constant {31} difference, and more particularly
I had arrived at the knowledge of the entire command it would have
over the computation of the most important classes of tables, those
of astronomy and of navigation. I was also most anxious to give my
whole time to the completion of the mechanism of the Difference Engine
No. 1 which I had then in hand. Small as the admitted duties of the
Lucasian Chair were, I felt that they would absorb time which I thought
better devoted to the completion of the Difference Engine. If I had
then been aware that the lapse of a few years would have thrown upon
me the enormous labour which the Analytical Engine absorbed, no motive
short of absolute necessity would have induced me to accept any office
which might, in the slightest degree, withdraw my attention from its
contrivance.

The result of this consultation with my two friends was, that I
determined to accept the Chair of Newton, and to hold it for a few
years. In 1839 the demands of the Analytical Engine upon my attention
had become so incessant and so exhausting, that even the few duties
of the Lucasian Chair had a sensible effect in impairing my bodily
strength. I therefore sent in my resignation.

〈FIRST EXAMINATION.〉

In January, 1829, I visited Cambridge, to fulfil one of the first
duties of my new office, the examination for Dr. Smith’s prizes.

These two prizes, of twenty-five pounds each, exercise a very curious
and important influence. Usually three or four hundred young men are
examined previously to taking their degree. The University officers
examine and place them in the order of their mathematical merit. The
class called Wranglers is the highest; of these the first is called the
senior wrangler, the others the second and third, &c., wranglers. {32}

All the young men who have just taken their degree, whether with or
without honours, are qualified to compete for the Smith’s prizes by
sending in notice to the electors, who consist of the three Professors
of Geometry, Astronomy, and Physics, assisted occasionally by two
official electors, the Vice-Chancellor and the Master of Trinity
College. However, in point of fact, generally three, and rarely above
six young men compete.

〈COURT OF APPEAL.〉

It is manifest that the University officers, who examine several
hundred young men, cannot bestow the same minute attention upon
each as those who, at the utmost, only examine six. Nor is this of
any importance, except to the few first wranglers, who usually are
candidates for these prizes. The consequence is that the examiners
of the Smith’s prizes constitute, as it were, a court of appeal from
the decision of the University officers. The decision of the latter
is thus therefore, necessarily appealed against upon every occasion.
Perhaps in one out of five or six cases the second or third wrangler
obtains the first Smith’s prize. I may add that in the few cases known
to me previously to my becoming an examiner, the public opinion of
the University always approved those decisions, without implying any
censure on the officers of the University.

In forming my set of questions, I consulted the late Dean of Ely and
another friend, in order that I might not suddenly deviate too much
from the usual style of examinations.

After having examined the young men, I sat up the whole night,
carefully weighing the relative merits of their answers. I found, with
some mortification, that, according to my marks, the second wrangler
ought to have the first prize. I therefore put aside the papers until
the day before the decision. I then took an unmarked copy of my
questions, and put new {33} numbers for their respective values. After
very carefully going over the whole of the examination-papers again, I
arrived almost exactly at my former conclusion.

〈REMARKABLE AGREEMENT.〉

On our meeting at the Vice-Chancellor’s, that functionary asked me,
as the senior professor, what was my decision as to the two prizes. I
stated that the result of my examination obliged me to award the first
prize to the second wrangler. Professor Airy was then asked the same
question. He made the same reply. Professor Lax being then asked, said
he had arrived at the same conclusion as his two colleagues.

The Vice-Chancellor remarked that when we altered the arrangement of
the University Examiners, it was very satisfactory that we should be
unanimous. Professor Airy observed that this satisfaction was enhanced
by the fact of the remarkable difference in the tastes of the three
examiners.

The Vice-Chancellor, turning to me, asked whether it might be permitted
to inquire the numbers we had respectively assigned to each candidate.

I and my colleagues immediately mentioned our numbers, which Professor
Airy at once reduced to a common scale. On this it appeared that the
number of marks assigned to each by Professor Airy and myself very
nearly agreed, whilst that of Professor Lax differed but little.

On this occasion the first Smith’s prize was assigned to the second
wrangler, Mr. Cavendish, now Duke of Devonshire, the present Chancellor
of the University.

The result of the whole of my after-experience showed that amongst
the highest men the peculiar tastes of the examiners had no effect in
disturbing the proper decision.

I held the Chair of Newton for some few years, and still feel deeply
grateful for the honour the University conferred {34} upon me—the only
honour I ever received in my own country.[11]

     [11] This professorship is not in the gift of the Government. The
     electors are the masters of the various colleges. It was founded
     in 1663 by Henry Lucas, M.P. for the University, and was endowed
     by him with a small estate in Bedfordshire. During my tenure of
     that office my net receipts were between 80 _l._ and 90 _l._ a
     year. I am glad to find that the estate is now improved, and that
     the University have added an annual salary to the Chair of Newton.

I must now return to my pursuits during my residence at Cambridge, the
account of which has been partially interrupted by the history of my
appointment to the Chair of Newton.

Whilst I was an undergraduate, I lived probably in a greater variety
of sets than any of my young companions. But my chief and choicest
consisted of some ten or a dozen friends who usually breakfasted with
me every Sunday after chapel; arriving at about nine, and remaining
to between twelve and one o’clock. We discussed all knowable and many
unknowable things.

〈GHOST CLUB—EXTRACTORS.〉

At one time we resolved ourselves into a Ghost Club, and proceeded to
collect evidence, and entered into a considerable correspondence upon
the subject. Some of this was both interesting and instructive.

At another time we resolved ourselves into a Club which we called The
Extractors. Its rules were as follows,—

1st. Every member shall communicate his address to the Secretary once
in six months.

2nd. If this communication is delayed beyond twelve months, it shall be
taken for granted that his relatives had shut him up as insane.

3rd. Every effort legal and illegal shall be made to get him out of the
madhouse. Hence the name of the club—The Extractors. {35}

4th. Every candidate for admission as a member shall produce six
certificates. Three that he is sane and three others that he is insane.

It has often occurred to me to inquire of my legal friends whether, if
the sanity of any member of the club had been questioned in after-life,
he would have adduced the fact of membership of the Club of Extractors
as an indication of sanity or of insanity.

〈SHYNESS—CHESS.〉

During the first part of my residence at Cambridge, I played at chess
very frequently, often with D’Arblay and with several other good
players. There was at that period a fellow-commoner at Trinity named
Brande, who devoted almost his whole time to the study of chess. I was
invited to meet him one evening at the rooms of a common friend for the
purpose of trying our strength.

On arriving at my friend’s rooms, I found a note informing me that he
had gone to Newmarket, and had left coffee and the chessmen for us. I
was myself tormented by great shyness, and my yet unseen adversary was,
I understood, equally diffident. I was sitting before the chess-board
when Brande entered. I rose, he advanced, sat down, and took a white
and a black pawn from the board, which he held, one in either hand. I
pointed with my finger to the left hand and won the move.

The game then commenced; it was rather a long one, and I won it: but
not a word was exchanged until the end: when Brande uttered the first
word. “Another?” To this I nodded assent.

How that game was decided I do not now remember; but the first sentence
pronounced by either of us, was a remark by Brande, that he had lost
the first game by a certain move of his white bishop. To this I
replied, that I thought he was {36} mistaken, and that the real cause
of his losing the game arose from the use I had made of my knight two
moves previously to his white bishop’s move.

We then immediately began to replace the men on the board in the
positions they occupied at that particular point of the game when the
white bishop’s move was made. Each took up any piece indiscriminately,
and placed it without hesitation on the exact square on which it had
stood. It then became apparent that the effective move to which I had
referred was that of my knight.

Brande, during his residence at Cambridge, studied chess regularly
several hours each day, and read almost every treatise on the subject.
After he left college he travelled abroad, took lessons from every
celebrated teacher, and played with all the most eminent players on the
Continent.

At intervals of three or four years I occasionally met him in London.
After the usual greeting he always proposed that we should play a game
of chess.

I found on these occasions, that if I played any of the ordinary
openings, such as are found in the books, I was sure to be beaten. The
only way in which I had a chance of winning, was by making early in
the game a move so bad that it had not been mentioned in any treatise.
Brande possessed, and had read, almost every book upon the subject.

〈SIXPENNY WHIST.〉

Another set which I frequently joined were addicted to sixpenny whist.
It consisted of Higman, afterwards Tutor of Trinity; Follet, afterwards
Attorney-General; of a learned and accomplished Dean still living, and
I have no doubt still playing an excellent rubber, and myself. We not
unfrequently sat from chapel-time in the evening until the sound {37}
of the morning chapel bell again called us to our religious duties.

I mixed occasionally with a different set of whist players at Jesus
College. They played high: guinea points, and five guineas on the
rubber. I was always a most welcome visitor, not from my skill at
the game; but because I never played more than shilling points and
five shillings on the rubber. Consequently my partner had what they
considered an advantage: namely, that of playing guinea points with one
of our adversaries and pound points with the other.

〈EXPEDITIONS TO THE FENS.〉

Totally different in character was another set in which I mixed. I was
very fond of boating, not of the manual labour of rowing, but the more
intellectual art of sailing. I kept a beautiful light, London-built
boat, and occasionally took long voyages down the river, beyond Ely
into the fens. To accomplish these trips, it was necessary to have two
or three strong fellows to row when the wind failed or was contrary.
These were useful friends upon my aquatic expeditions, but not being
of exactly the same calibre as my friends of the Ghost Club, were very
cruelly and disrespectfully called by them “my Tom fools.”

The plan of our voyage was thus:—I sent my servant to the apothecary
for a thing called an ægrotat, which I understood, for I never saw
one, meant a certificate that I was indisposed, and that it would be
injurious to my health to attend chapel, or hall, or lectures. This was
forwarded to the college authorities.

I also directed my servant to order the cook to send me a large
well-seasoned meat pie, a couple of fowls, &c. These were packed in a
hamper with three or four bottles of wine and one of noyeau. We sailed
when the wind was fair, and rowed when there was none. Whittlesea Mere
was a very {38} favourite resort for sailing, fishing, and shooting.
Sometimes we reached Lynn. After various adventures and five or six
days of hard exercise in the open air, we returned with our health more
renovated than if the best physician had prescribed for us.

       *       *       *       *       *

〈CHEMISTRY.〉

During my residence at Cambridge, Smithson Tennant was the Professor
of Chemistry, and I attended his lectures. Having a spare room, I
turned it into a kind of laboratory, in which Herschel worked with me,
until he set up a rival one of his own. We both occasionally assisted
the Professor in preparing his experiments. The science of chemistry
had not then assumed the vast development it has now attained. I gave
up its practical pursuit soon after I resided in London, but I have
never regretted the time I bestowed upon it at the commencement of my
career. I had hoped to have long continued to enjoy the friendship of
my entertaining and valued instructor, and to have profited by his
introducing me to the science of the metropolis, but his tragical fate
deprived me of that advantage. Whilst riding with General Bulow across
a drawbridge at Boulogne, the bolt having been displaced, Smithson
Tennant was precipitated to the bottom, and killed on the spot. The
General, having an earlier warning, set spurs to his horse, and just
escaped a similar fate.

〈TRANSLATION OF LACROIX.〉

My views respecting the notation of Leibnitz now (1812) received
confirmation from an extensive course of reading. I became convinced
that the notation of fluxions must ultimately prove a strong impediment
to the progress of English science. But I knew, also, that it was
hopeless for any young and unknown author to attempt to introduce the
notation of Leibnitz into an elementary work. This opinion naturally
{39} suggested to me the idea of translating the smaller work of
Lacroix. It is possible, although I have no recollection of it, that
the same idea may have occurred to several of my colleagues of the
Analytical Society, but most of them were so occupied, first with their
degree, and then with their examination for fellowships, that no steps
were at that time taken by any of them on that subject.

Unencumbered by these distractions, I commenced the task, but at what
period of time I do not exactly recollect. I had finished a portion
of the translation, and laid it aside, when, some years afterwards,
Peacock called on me in Devonshire Street, and stated that both
Herschel and himself were convinced that the change from the dots to
the d’s would not be accomplished until some foreign work of eminence
should be translated into English. Peacock then proposed that I
should either finish the translation which I had commenced, or that
Herschel and himself should complete the remainder of my translation.
I suggested that we should toss up which alternative to take. It was
determined by lot that we should make a joint translation. Some months
after, the translation of the small work of Lacroix was published.

For several years after, the progress of the notation of Leibnitz at
Cambridge was slow. It is true that the tutors of the two largest
colleges had adopted it, but it was taught at none of the other
colleges.

〈COLLECTION OF EXAMPLES.〉

It is always difficult to think and reason in a new language, and
this difficulty discouraged all but men of energetic minds. I saw,
however, that, by making it their interest to do so, the change might
be accomplished. I therefore proposed to make a large collection of
examples of the differential and integral calculus, consisting merely
of the statement of each problem and its final solution. I foresaw
that if such a {40} publication existed, all those tutors who did not
approve of the change of the Newtonian notation would yet, in order to
save their own time and trouble, go to this collection of examples to
find problems to set to their pupils. After a short time the use of
the new signs would become familiar, and I anticipated their general
adoption at Cambridge as a matter of course.

I commenced by copying out a large portion of the work of Hirsch. I
then communicated to Peacock and Herschel my view, and proposed that
they should each contribute a portion.

Peacock considerably modified my plan by giving the process of solution
to a large number of the questions. Herschel prepared the questions
in finite differences, and I supplied the examples to the calculus of
functions. In a very few years the change was completely established;
and thus at last the English cultivators of mathematical science,
untrammelled by a limited and imperfect system of signs, entered on
equal terms into competition with their continental rivals.

{41}




CHAPTER V.

DIFFERENCE ENGINE NO. 1.


 “Oh no! we never mention it,
 Its name is never heard.”

 Difference Engine No. 1 — First Idea at Cambridge, 1812 — Plan for
 Dividing Astronomical Instruments — Idea of a Machine to calculate
 Tables by Differences — Illustrations by Piles of Cannon-balls.

Calculating Machines comprise various pieces of mechanism for assisting
the human mind in executing the operations of arithmetic. Some few of
these perform the whole operation without any mental attention when
once the given numbers have been put into the machine.

Others require a moderate portion of mental attention: these latter are
generally of much simpler construction than the former, and it may also
be added, are less useful.

The simplest way of deciding to which of these two classes any
calculating machine belongs is to ask its maker—Whether, when the
numbers on which it is to operate are placed in the instrument, it is
capable of arriving at its result by the mere motion of a spring, a
descending weight, or any other constant force? If the answer be in the
affirmative, the machine is really automatic; if otherwise, it is not
self-acting.

Of the various machines I have had occasion to examine, many of those
for Addition and Subtraction have been found {42} to be automatic.
Of machines for Multiplication and Division, which have fully come
under my examination, I cannot at present recall one to my memory as
absolutely fulfilling this condition.

〈ORIGIN OF DIFFERENCE ENGINE.〉

The earliest idea that I can trace in my own mind of calculating
arithmetical Tables by machinery arose in this manner:—

One evening I was sitting in the rooms of the Analytical Society, at
Cambridge, my head leaning forward on the Table in a kind of dreamy
mood, with a Table of logarithms lying open before me. Another member,
coming into the room, and seeing me half asleep, called out, “Well,
Babbage, what are you dreaming about?” to which I replied, “I am
thinking that all these Tables (pointing to the logarithms) might be
calculated by machinery.”

I am indebted to my friend, the Rev. Dr. Robinson, the Master of the
Temple, for this anecdote. The event must have happened either in 1812
or 1813.

About 1819 I was occupied with devising means for accurately dividing
astronomical instruments, and had arrived at a plan which I thought was
likely to succeed perfectly. I had also at that time been speculating
about making machinery to compute arithmetical Tables.

One morning I called upon the late Dr. Wollaston, to consult him about
my plan for dividing instruments. On talking over the matter, it turned
out that my system was exactly that which had been described by the
Duke de Chaulnes, in the Memoirs of the French Academy of Sciences,
about fifty or sixty years before. I then mentioned my other idea of
computing Tables by machinery, which Dr. Wollaston thought a more
promising subject.

I considered that a machine to execute the mere isolated {43}
operations of arithmetic, would be comparatively of little value,
unless it were very easily set to do its work, and unless it executed
not only accurately, but with great rapidity, whatever it was required
to do.

〈ADDITION AND CARRIAGE.〉

On the other hand, the method of differences supplied a general
principle by which _all_ Tables might be computed through limited
intervals, by one uniform process. Again, the method of differences
required the use of mechanism for Addition only. In order, however,
to insure accuracy in the printed Tables, it was necessary that the
machine which computed Tables should also set them up in type, or else
supply a mould in which stereotype plates of those Tables could be cast.

I now began to sketch out arrangements for accomplishing the several
partial processes which were required. The arithmetical part must
consist of two distinct processes—the power of adding one digit to
another, and also of carrying the tens to the next digit, if it should
be necessary.

The first idea was, naturally, to add each digit successively. This,
however, would occupy much time if the numbers added together consisted
of many places of figures.

The next step was to add all the digits of the two numbers each to each
at the same instant, but reserving a certain mechanical memorandum,
wherever a carriage became due. These carriages were then to be
executed successively.

Having made various drawings, I now began to make models of some
portions of the machine, to see how they would act. Each number was to
be expressed upon wheels placed upon an axis; there being one wheel for
each figure in the number operated upon.

Having arrived at a certain point in my progress, it became necessary
to have teeth of a peculiar form cut upon these {44} wheels. As my own
lathe was not fit for this job, I took the wheels to a wheel-cutter at
Lambeth, to whom I carefully conveyed my instructions, leaving with him
a drawing as his guide.

〈UNEXPECTED DIFFICULTY EXPLAINED.〉

These wheels arrived late one night, and the next morning I began
putting them in action with my other mechanism, when, to my utter
astonishment, I found they were quite unfit for their task. I examined
the shape of their teeth, compared them with those in the drawings, and
found they agreed perfectly; yet they could not perform their intended
work. I had been so certain of the truth of my previous reasoning, that
I now began to be somewhat uneasy. I reflected that, if the reasoning
about which I had been so certain should prove to have been really
fallacious, I could then no longer trust the power of my own reason.
I therefore went over with my wheels to the artist who had formed
the teeth, in order that I might arrive at some explanation of this
extraordinary contradiction.

On conferring with him, it turned out that, when he had understood
fully the peculiar form of the teeth of wheels, he discovered that his
wheel-cutting engine had not got amongst its divisions that precise
number which I had required. He therefore had asked me whether another
number, which his machine possessed, would not equally answer my
object. I had inadvertently replied in the affirmative. He then made
arrangements for the precise number of teeth I required; and the new
wheels performed their expected duty perfectly.

The next step was to devise means for printing the tables to be
computed by this machine. My first plan was to make it put together
moveable type. I proposed to make metal boxes, each containing 3,000
types of one of the ten digits. These types were to be made to pass out
one by one from the {45} bottom of their boxes, when required by the
computing part of the machine.

〈VERIFICATION OF TYPE.〉

But here a new difficulty arose. The attendant who put the types into
the boxes might, by mistake, put a wrong type in one or more of them.
This cause of error I removed in the following manner:—There are
usually certain notches in the side of the type. I caused these notches
to be so placed that all the types of any given digit possessed the
same characteristic notches, which no other type had. Thus, when the
boxes were filled, by passing a small wire down these peculiar notches,
it would be impeded in its passage, if there were included in the row a
single wrong figure. Also, if any digit were accidentally turned upside
down, it would be indicated by the stoppage of the testing wire.

One notch was reserved as common to every species of type. The object
of this was that, before the types which the Difference Engine had
used for its computation were removed from the iron platform on which
they were placed, a steel wire should be passed through this common
notch, and remain there. The tables, composed of moveable types,
thus interlocked, could never have any of their figures drawn out by
adhesion to the inking-roller, and then by possibility be restored in
an inverted order. A small block of such figures tied together by a bit
of string, remained unbroken for several years, although it was rather
roughly used as a plaything by my children. One such box was finished,
and delivered its type satisfactorily.

Another plan for printing the tables, was to place the ordinary
printing type round the edges of wheels. Then, as each successive
number was produced by the arithmetical part, the type-wheels would
move down upon a plate of soft composition, upon which the tabular
number would be {46} impressed. This mould was formed of a mixture
of plaster-of-Paris with other materials, so as to become hard in the
course of a few hours.

〈MOULDS AND COPPER-PLATE.〉

The first difficulty arose from the impression of one tabular number on
the mould being distorted by the succeeding one.

I was not then aware that a very slight depth of impression from
the type would be quite sufficient. I surmounted the difficulty
by previously passing a roller, having longitudinal wedge-shaped
projections, over the plastic material. This formed a series of small
depressions in the matrix between each line. Thus the expansion
arising from the impression of one line partially filled up the small
depression or ditch which occurred between each successive line.

The various minute difficulties of this kind were successively
overcome; but subsequent experience has proved that the depth necessary
for stereotype moulds is very small, and that even thick paper,
prepared in a peculiar manner, is quite sufficient for the purpose.

Another series of experiments were, however, made for the purpose of
punching the computed numbers upon copper plate. A special machine was
contrived and constructed, which might be called a co-ordinate machine,
because it moved the copper plate and steel punches in the direction
of three rectangular co-ordinates. This machine was afterwards found
very useful for many other purposes. It was, in fact, a general shaping
machine, upon which many parts of the Difference Engine were formed.

Several specimens of surface and copper-plate printing, as well as
of the copper plates, produced by these means, were exhibited at the
Exhibition of 1862.

I have proposed and drawn various machines for the purpose of
calculating a series of numbers forming Tables {47} by means of a
certain system called “The Method of Differences,” which it is the
object of this sketch to explain.

The first Difference Engine with which I am acquainted comprised a
few figures, and was made by myself, between 1820 and June 1822. It
consisted of from six to eight figures. A much larger and more perfect
engine was subsequently commenced in 1823 for the Government.

It was proposed that this latter Difference Engine should have six
orders of differences, each consisting of about twenty places of
figures, and also that it should print the Tables it computed.

The small portion of it which was placed in the International
Exhibition of 1862 was put together nearly thirty years ago. It was
accompanied by various parts intended to enable it to print the results
it calculated, either as a single copy on paper—or by putting together
moveable types—or by stereotype plates taken from moulds punched by the
machine—or from copper plates impressed by it. The parts necessary for
the execution of each of these processes were made, but these were not
at that time attached to the calculating part of the machine.

A considerable number of the parts by which the printing was to be
accomplished, as also several specimens of portions of tables punched
on copper, and of stereotype moulds, were exhibited in a glass case
adjacent to the Engine.

〈‘EDINBURGH REVIEW.’〉

In 1834 Dr. Lardner published, in the ‘Edinburgh Review,’[12] a very
elaborate description of this portion of the machine, in which he
explained clearly the method of Differences.

     [12] ‘Edinburgh Review,’ No. cxx., July, 1834.

It is very singular that two persons, one resident in London, the
other in Sweden, should both have been struck, on reading this review,
with the simplicity of the mathematical principle {48} of differences
as applied to the calculation of Tables, and should have been so
fascinated with it as to have undertaken to construct a machine of the
kind.

〈MR. DEACON—MR. SCHEUTZ.〉

Mr. Deacon, of Beaufort House, Strand, whose mechanical skill is well
known, made, for his own satisfaction, a small model of the calculating
part of such a machine, which was shown only to a few friends, and of
the existence of which I was not aware until after the Swedish machine
was brought to London.

Mr. Scheutz, an eminent printer at Stockholm, had far greater
difficulties to encounter. The construction of mechanism, as well as
the mathematical part of the question, was entirely new to him. He,
however, undertook to make a machine having four differences, and
fourteen places of figures, and capable of printing its own Tables.

After many years’ indefatigable labour, and an almost ruinous expense,
aided by grants from his Government, by the constant assistance
of his son, and by the support of many enlightened members of the
Swedish Academy, he completed his Difference Engine. It was brought
to London, and some time afterwards exhibited at the great Exhibition
at Paris. It was then purchased for the Dudley Observatory at Albany
by an enlightened and public-spirited merchant of that city, John F.
Rathbone, Esq.

An exact copy of this machine was made by Messrs. Donkin and Co., for
the English Government, and is now in use in the Registrar-General’s
Department at Somerset House. It is very much to be regretted that this
specimen of English workmanship was not exhibited in the International
Exhibition. {49}


_Explanation of the Difference Engine._

Those who are only familiar with ordinary arithmetic may, by following
out with the pen some of the examples which will be given, easily
make themselves acquainted with the simple principles on which the
Difference Engine acts.

〈ARITHMETICAL TABLES.〉

It is necessary to state distinctly at the outset, that the Difference
Engine is not intended to answer special questions. Its object is to
calculate and print a _series_ of results formed according to given
laws. These are called Tables—many such are in use in various trades.
For example—there are collections of Tables of the amount of any number
of pounds from 1 to 100 lbs. of butchers’ meat at various prices per
lb. Let us examine one of these Tables: viz.—the price of meat 5 _d._
per lb., we find

 Number.    Table.
  Lbs.      Price.
          _s._ _d._
   1       0    5
   2       0   10
   3       1    3
   4       1    8
   5       2    1

There are two ways of computing this Table:—

1st. We might have multiplied the number of lbs. in each line by 5, the
price per lb., and have put down the result in _l._ _s._ _d._, as in
the 2nd column: or,

2nd. We might have put down the price of 1 lb., which is 5 _d._, and
have added five pence for each succeeding lb.

Let us now examine the relative advantages of each plan. We shall find
that if we had multiplied each number of lbs. in {50} the Table by
5, and put down the resulting amount, then every number in the Table
would have been computed independently. If, therefore, an error had
been committed, it would not have affected any but the single tabular
number at which it had been made. On the other hand, if a single error
had occurred in the system of computing by adding five at each step,
any such error would have rendered the whole of the rest of the Table
untrue.

〈DIFFERENCES.〉

Thus the system of calculating by differences, which is the easiest,
is much more liable to error. It has, on the other hand, this great
advantage: viz., that when the Table has been so computed, if we
calculate its last term directly, and if it agree with the last term
found by the continual addition of 5, we shall then be quite certain
that every term throughout is correct. In the system of computing each
term directly, we possess no such check upon our accuracy.

Now the Table we have been considering is, in fact, merely a Table
whose first difference is constant and equal to five. If we express it
in pence it becomes—

      Table.  1st Difference.
 1       5          5
 2      10          5
 3      15          5
 4      20          5
 5      25

Any machine, therefore, which could add one number to another, and at
the same time retain the original number called the first difference
for the next operation, would be able to compute all such Tables.

〈GROUPS OF MARBLES.〉

Let us now consider another form of Table which might readily occur to
a boy playing with his marbles, or to a young lady with the balls of
her solitaire board. {51}

The boy may place a row of his marbles on the sand, at equal distances
from each other, thus—

[Illustration]

He might then, beginning with the second, place two other marbles under
each, thus—

[Illustration]

He might then, beginning with the third, place three other marbles
under each group, and so on; commencing always one group later, and
making the addition one marble more each time. The several groups would
stand thus arranged—

[Illustration]

He will not fail to observe that he has thus formed a series of
triangular groups, every group having an equal number of marbles in
each of its three sides. Also that the side of each successive group
contains one more marble than that of its preceding group.

Now an inquisitive boy would naturally count the numbers in each group
and he would find them thus—

 1      3      6      10      15      21

He might also want to know how many marbles the thirtieth or any other
distant group might contain. Perhaps he might go to papa to obtain
this information; but I much fear papa would snub him, and would tell
him that it was nonsense—that it was useless—that nobody knew the
number, and so forth. If the boy is told by papa, that he is not able
to answer the question, then I recommend him to pay careful attention
to whatever that father may at any time say, for he has overcome two of
the greatest obstacles to the acquisition {52} of knowledge—inasmuch
as he possesses the consciousness that he does not know—and he has the
moral courage to avow it.[13]

     [13] The most remarkable instance I ever met with of the
     distinctness with which any individual perceived the exact
     boundary of his own knowledge, was that of the late Dr. Wollaston.

If papa fail to inform him, let him go to mamma, who will not fail
to find means to satisfy her darling’s curiosity. In the meantime
the author of this sketch will endeavour to lead his young friend to
make use of his own common sense for the purpose of becoming better
acquainted with the triangular figures he has formed with his marbles.

〈SECOND DIFFERENCE CONSTANT.〉

In the case of the Table of the price of butchers’ meat, it was obvious
that it could be formed by adding the same _constant_ difference
continually to the first term. Now suppose we place the numbers of
our groups of marbles in a column, as we did our prices of various
weights of meat. Instead of adding a certain difference, as we did in
the former case, let us subtract the figures representing each group
of marbles from the figures of the succeeding group in the Table. The
process will stand thus:—

                     Table.          1st Difference.     2nd Difference.

 Number of     Number of Marbles   Difference between the
 the Group.     in each Group.      number of Marbles in
                                    each Group and that
                                    in the next.

     1                    1                1                     1
     2                    3                2                     1
     3                    6                3                     1
     4                   10                4                     1
     5                   15                5                     1
     6                   21                6
     7                   28                7

It is usual to call the third column thus formed _the column of_ {53}
_first differences_. It is evident in the present instance that that
column represents the natural numbers. But we already know that the
first difference of the natural numbers is constant and equal to unity.
It appears, therefore, that a Table of these numbers, representing
the group of marbles, might be constructed to any extent by mere
addition—using the number 1 as the first number of the Table, the
number 1 as the first Difference, and also the number 1 as the second
Difference, which last always remains constant.

Now as we could find the value of any given number of pounds of meat
directly, without going through all the previous part of the Table, so
by a somewhat different rule we can find at once the value of any group
whose number is given.

Thus, if we require the number of marbles in the fifth group, proceed
thus:—

 Take the number of the group                5
 Add 1 to this number, it becomes            6
                                          ────
     Multiply these numbers together      2)30
                                          ────
 Divide the product by 2                    15

 This gives 15, the number of marbles in the 5th group.

If the reader will take the trouble to calculate with his pencil the
five groups given above, he will soon perceive the general truth of
this rule.

We have now arrived at the fact that this Table—like that of the price
of butchers’ meat—can be calculated by two different methods. By the
first, each number of the Table is calculated independently: by the
second, the truth of each number depends upon the truth of all the
previous numbers.

〈TRIANGULAR NUMBERS.〉

Perhaps my young friend may now ask me, What is the use of such Tables?
Until he has advanced further in his {54} arithmetical studies, he
must take for granted that they are of some use. The very Table about
which he has been reasoning possesses a special name—it is called a
Table of Triangular Numbers. Almost every general collection of Tables
hitherto published contains portions of it of more or less extent.

Above a century ago, a volume in small quarto, containing the first
20,000 triangular numbers, was published at the Hague by E. De
Joncourt, A.M., and Professor of Philosophy.[14] I cannot resist
quoting the author’s enthusiastic expression of the happiness he
enjoyed in composing his celebrated work:

     [14] ‘On the Nature and Notable Use of the most Simple Trigonal
     Numbers.’ By E. De Joncourt, at the Hague. 1762.

“The Trigonals here to be found, and nowhere else, are exactly
elaborate. Let the candid reader make the best of these numbers, and
feel (if possible) in perusing my work the pleasure I had in composing
it.

“That sweet joy may arise from such contemplations cannot be denied.
Numbers and lines have many charms, unseen by vulgar eyes, and only
discovered to the unwearied and respectful sons of Art. In features the
serpentine line (who starts not at the name) produces beauty and love;
and in numbers, high powers, and humble roots, give soft delight.

“Lo! the raptured arithmetician! Easily satisfied, he asks no Brussels
lace, nor a coach and six. To calculate, contents his liveliest
desires, and obedient numbers are within his reach.”

〈SQUARE NUMBERS.〉

I hope my young friend is acquainted with the fact—that the product of
any number multiplied by itself is called the square of that number.
Thus 36 is the product of 6 multiplied by 6, and 36 is called the
square of 6. I would now recommend him to examine the series of square
numbers

 1, 4, 9, 16, 25, 36, 49, 64, &c.,

{55} and to make, for his own instruction, the series of their first
and second differences, and then to apply to it the same reasoning
which has been already applied to the Table of Triangular Numbers.

〈CANNON BALLS.〉

When he feels that he has mastered that Table, I shall be happy to
accompany mamma’s darling to Woolwich or to Portsmouth, where he will
find some practical illustrations of the use of his newly-acquired
numbers. He will find scattered about in the Arsenal various heaps of
cannon balls, some of them triangular, others square or oblong pyramids.

Looking on the simplest form—the triangular pyramid—he will observe
that it exactly represents his own heaps of marbles placed each
successively above one another until the top of the pyramid contains
only a single ball.

The new series thus formed by the addition of his own triangular
numbers is—

 Number. Table. 1st Difference. 2nd Difference. 3rd Difference.
    1       1          3               3               1
    2       4          6               4               1
    3      10         10               5               1
    4      20         15               6
    5      35         21
    6      56

He will at once perceive that this Table of the number of cannon balls
contained in a triangular pyramid can be carried to any extent by
simply adding successive differences, the third of which is constant.

The next step will naturally be to inquire how any number in this Table
can be calculated by itself. A little consideration will lead him to a
fair guess; a little industry will enable him to confirm his conjecture.

It will be observed at p. 49 that in order to find {56} independently
any number of the Table of the price of butchers’ meat, the following
rule was observed:—

〈NUMBER IN EACH PILE.〉

Take the number whose tabular number is required.

Multiply it by the first difference.

This product is equal to the required tabular number.

Again, at p. 53, the rule for finding any triangular number was:—

 Take the number of the group             5
 Add 1 to this number, it becomes         6
                                       ────
 Multiply these numbers together       2)30
                                       ────
 Divide the product by 2                 15

This is the number of marbles in the 5th group.

Now let us make a bold conjecture respecting the Table of cannon balls,
and try this rule:—

 Take the number whose tabular number is
   required, say                          5
 Add 1 to that number                     6
 Add 1 more to that number                7
                                      ─────
 Multiply all three numbers together  2)210
                                      ─────
 Divide by 2                            105
                                      ─────

The real number in the 5th pyramid is 35. But the number 105 at which
we have arrived is exactly three times as great. If, therefore, instead
of dividing by 2 we had divided by 2 and also by 3, we should have
arrived at a true result in this instance.

The amended rule is therefore— {57}

 Take the number whose tabular number is
   required, say                                _n_
 Add 1 to it                                    _n_ + 1
 Add 1 to this                                  _n_ + 2
 Multiply these three numbers
   together                  _n_ × (_n_ + 1) × (_n_ + 2)
 Divide by 1 × 2 × 3.
 The result is                 (_n_(_n_ + 1)(_n_ + 2))/6

This rule will, upon trial, be found to give correctly every tabular
number.

By similar reasoning we might arrive at the knowledge of the number of
cannon balls in square and rectangular pyramids. But it is presumed
that enough has been stated to enable the reader to form some general
notion of the method of calculating arithmetical Tables by differences
which are constant.

〈ASTRONOMICAL TABLES.〉

It may now be stated that mathematicians have discovered that all the
Tables most important for practical purposes, such as those relating
to Astronomy and Navigation, can, although they may not possess any
constant differences, still be calculated in detached portions by that
method.

Hence the importance of having machinery to calculate by differences,
which, if well made, cannot err; and which, if carelessly set, presents
in the last term it calculates the power of verification of every
antecedent term.


_Of the Mechanical Arrangements necessary for computing Tables by the
Method of Differences._

From the preceding explanation it appears that all Tables may be
calculated, to a greater or less extent, by the method of Differences.
That method requires, for its successful {58} execution, little beyond
mechanical means of performing the arithmetical operation of Addition.
Subtraction can, by the aid of a well-known artifice, be converted into
Addition.

〈ADDITION.〉

The process of Addition includes two distinct parts—1st. The first
consists of the addition of any one digit to another digit; 2nd. The
second consists in carrying the tens to the next digit above.

Let us take the case of the addition of the two following numbers, in
which no carriages occur:—

 6023
 1970
 ────
 7993

It will be observed that, in making this addition, the mind acts by
successive steps. The person adding says to himself—

 0 and 3 make three,
 7 and 2 make nine,
 9 and 0 make nine,
 1 and 6 make seven.

〈CARRIAGE.〉

In the following addition there are several carriages:—

 2648
 4564
 ────
 7212

The person adding says to himself—

             4 and 8 make 12: put down 2 and carry one.
 1 and 6 are 7 and 4 make 11: put down 1 and carry one.
 1 and 5 are 6 and 6 make 12: put down 2 and carry one.
 1 and 4 are 5 and 2 make 7: put down 7.

Now, the length of time required for adding one number to another is
mainly dependent upon the number of figures to {59} be added. If we
could tell the average time required by the mind to add two figures
together, the time required for adding any given number of figures to
another equal number would be found by multiplying that average time by
the number of digits in either number.

When we attempt to perform such additions by machinery we might follow
exactly the usual process of the human mind. In that case we might take
a series of wheels, each having marked on its edges the digits 0, 1, 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9. These wheels might be placed above each other upon
an axis. The lowest would indicate the units’ figure, the next above
the tens, and so on, as in the Difference Engine at the Exhibition, a
woodcut of which faces the title-page.

Several such axes, with their figure wheels, might be placed around a
system of central wheels, with which the wheels of any one or more axes
might at times be made to gear. Thus the figures on any one axis might,
by means of those central wheels, be added to the figure wheels of any
other axis.

But it may fairly be expected, and it is indeed of great importance
that calculations made by machinery should not merely be exact, but
that they should be done in a much shorter time than those performed by
the human mind. Suppose there were no tens to carry, as in the first
of the two cases; then, if we possessed mechanism capable of adding
any one digit to any other in the units’ place of figures, a similar
mechanism might be placed above it to add the tens’ figures, and so on
for as many figures as might be required.

But in this case, since there are no carriages, each digit might be
added to its corresponding digit at the same time. Thus, the time of
adding by means of mechanism, any two numbers, however many figures
they might consist of, would {60} not exceed that of adding a single
digit to another digit. If this could be accomplished it would render
additions and subtractions with numbers having ten, twenty, fifty, or
any number of figures, as rapid as those operations are with single
figures.

〈SUCCESSIVE CARRIAGE.〉

Let us now examine the case in which there were several carriages. Its
successive stages may be better explained, thus—

                                 2648
                                 4584
 Stages.                         ────
   1 Add units’ figure = 4       2642
   2 Carry                         1
                                 ────
                                 2652
   3 Add tens’ figure = 8          8
                                 2632
   4 Carry                        1
                                 ────
                                 2732
   5 Add hundreds’ figure = 5     5
                                 ────
                                 2232
   6 Carry                       1
                                 ────
                                 3232
   7 Add thousands’ figure = 4   4
                                 ────
                                 7232
   8 Carry 0. There is no carr.

Now if, as in this case, all the carriages were known, it would then be
possible to make all the additions of digits at the same time, provided
we could also record each carriage as it became due. We might then
complete the addition by adding, at the same instant, each carriage in
its proper place. The process would then stand thus:— {61}

 Stages
          2648
          4564
          ────
        │ 6102  Add each digit to the digit above.
   1    │ 111   Record the carriages.
          ────
   2    │ 7212  Add the above carriages.

Now, whatever mechanism is contrived for adding any one digit to any
other must, of course, be able to add the largest digit, nine, to that
other digit. Supposing, therefore, one unit of number to be passed
over in one second of time, it is evident that any number of pairs of
digits may be added together in nine seconds, and that, when all the
consequent carriages are known, as in the above case, it will cost one
second more to make those carriages. Thus, addition and carriage would
be completed in ten seconds, even though the numbers consisted each of
a hundred figures.

But, unfortunately, there are multitudes of cases in which the
carriages that become due are only known in successive periods of time.
As an example, add together the two following numbers:—

                                       8473
                                       1528
 Stages                               ─────
   1 Add all the digits                9991
   2 Carry on tens and warn next car.    1
                                      ─────
                                       9901
   3 Carry on hundreds, and ditto       1
                                      ─────
                                       9001
   4 Carry on thousands, and ditto     1
                                      ─────
                                      00001
   5 Carry on ten thousands           1
                                      ─────
                                      10001

{62}

In this case the carriages only become known successively, and they
amount to the number of figures to be added; consequently, the mere
addition of two numbers, each of fifty places of figures, would require
only nine seconds of time, whilst the possible carriages would consume
fifty seconds.

The mechanical means I employed to make these carriages bears some
slight analogy to the operation of the faculty of memory. A toothed
wheel had the ten digits marked upon its edge; between the nine and the
zero a projecting tooth was placed. Whenever any wheel, in receiving
addition, passed from nine to zero, the projecting tooth pushed over
a certain lever. Thus, as soon as the nine seconds of time required
for addition were ended, every carriage which had _become due_ was
indicated by the altered position of its lever. An arm now went round,
which was so contrived that the act of replacing that lever caused the
carriage which its position indicated to be made to the next figure
above. But this figure might be a nine, in which case, in passing to
zero, it would put over its lever, and so on. By placing the arms
spirally round an axis, these successive carriages were accomplished.

Multitudes of contrivances were designed, and almost endless drawings
made, for the purpose of economizing the time and simplifying the
mechanism of carriage. In that portion of the Difference Engine in
the Exhibition of 1862 the time of carriage has been reduced to about
one-fourth part of what was at first required.

〈ANTICIPATING CARRIAGE.〉

At last having exhausted, during years of labour, the principle of
successive carriages, it occurred to me that it might be possible
to teach mechanism to accomplish another mental process, namely—to
foresee. This idea occurred to me in October, 1834. It cost me
much thought, but the {63} principle was arrived at in a short
time. As soon as that was attained, the next step was to teach the
mechanism which could foresee to act upon that foresight. This was
not so difficult: certain mechanical means were soon devised which,
although very far from simple, were yet sufficient to demonstrate the
possibility of constructing such machinery.

The process of simplifying this form of carriage occupied me, at
intervals, during a long series of years. The demands of the Analytical
Engine, for the mechanical execution of arithmetical operations, were
of the most extensive kind. The multitude of similar parts required by
the Analytical Engine, amounting in some instances to upwards of fifty
thousand, rendered any, even the simplest, improvement of each part
a matter of the highest importance, more especially as regarded the
diminished amount of expenditure for its construction.


_Description of the existing portion of Difference Engine No. 1._

That portion of Difference Engine, No. 1, which during the last twenty
years has been in the museum of King’s College, at Somerset House, is
represented in the woodcut opposite the title page.

It consists of three columns; each column contains six cages; each cage
contains one figure-wheel.

The column on the right hand has its lowest figure-wheel covered by a
shade which is never removed, and to which the reader’s attention need
not be directed.

The figure-wheel next above may be placed by hand at any one of the ten
digits. In the woodcut it stands at zero.

The third, fourth, and fifth cages are exactly the same as the second.

The sixth cage contains exactly the same as the four just {64}
described. It also contains two other figure-wheels, which with a
similar one above the frame, may also be dismissed from the reader’s
attention. Those wheels are entirely unconnected with the moving part
of the engine, and are only used for memoranda.

It appears, therefore, that there are in the first column on the right
hand five figure-wheels, each of which may be set by hand to any of the
figures 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

The lowest of these figure-wheels represents the unit’s figure of
any number; the next above the ten’s figure, and so on. The highest
figure-wheel will therefore represent tens of thousands.

Now, as each of these figure-wheels may be set by hand to any digit,
it is possible to place on the first column any number up to 99999. It
is on these wheels that the Table to be calculated by the engine is
expressed. This column is called the Table column, and the axis of the
wheels the Table axis.

The second or middle column has also six cages, in each of which a
figure-wheel is placed. It will be observed that in the lowest cage,
the figure on the wheel is concealed by a shade. It may therefore be
dismissed from the attention. The five other figure-wheels are exactly
like the figure-wheels on the Table axis, and can also represent any
number up to 99999.

This column is called the First Difference column, and the axis is
called the First Difference axis.

The third column, which is that on the left hand, has also six cages,
in each of which is a figure-wheel capable of being set by hand to any
digit.

The mechanism is so contrived that whatever may be the numbers placed
respectively on the figure-wheels of each of {65} the three columns,
the following succession of operations will take place as long as the
handle is moved:—

1st. Whatever number is found upon the column of first differences will
be added to the number found upon the Table column.

2nd. The same first difference remaining upon its own column, the
number found upon the column of second differences will be added to
that first difference.

It appears, therefore, that with this small portion of the Engine any
Table may be computed by the method of differences, provided neither
the Table itself, nor its first and second differences, exceed five
places of figures.

If the whole Engine had been completed it would have had six orders of
differences, each of twenty places of figures, whilst the three first
columns would each have had half a dozen additional figures.

This is the simplest explanation of that portion of the Difference
Engine No. 1, at the Exhibition of 1862. There are, however, certain
modifications in this fragment which render its exhibition more
instructive, and which even give a mechanical insight into those higher
powers with which I had endowed it in its complete state.

As a matter of convenience in exhibiting it, there is an arrangement
by which the _three_ upper figures of the second difference are
transformed into a small engine which counts the natural numbers.

By this means it can be set to compute any Table whose second
difference is constant and less than 1000, whilst at the same time it
thus shows the position in the Table of each tabular number.

In the existing portion there are three bells; they can be respectively
ordered to ring when the Table, its first difference {66} and its
second difference, pass from positive to negative. Several weeks
after the machine had been placed in my drawing-room, a friend came
by appointment to test its power of calculating Tables. After the
Engine had computed several Tables, I remarked that it was evidently
finding the root of a quadratic equation; I therefore set the bells to
watch it. After some time the proper bell sounded twice, indicating,
and giving the two positive roots to be 28 and 30. The Table thus
calculated related to the barometer and really involved a quadratic
equation, although its maker had not previously observed it. I
afterwards set the Engine to tabulate a formula containing impossible
roots, and of course the other bell warned me when it had attained
those roots. I had never before used these bells, simply because I did
not think the power it thus possessed to be of any practical utility.

Again, the lowest cages of the Table, and of the first difference,
have been made use of for the purpose of illustrating three important
faculties of the finished engine.

1st. The portion exhibited can calculate any Table whose third
difference is constant and less than 10.

2nd. It can be used to show how much more rapidly astronomical Tables
can be calculated in an engine in which there is no constant difference.

3rd. It can be employed to illustrate those singular laws which might
continue to be produced through ages, and yet after an enormous
interval of time change into other different laws; each again to exist
for ages, and then to be superseded by new laws. These views were first
proposed in the “Ninth Bridgewater Treatise.”

〈CURIOUS QUESTIONS.〉

Amongst the various questions which have been asked respecting the
Difference Engine, I will mention a few of the most remarkable:—One
gentleman addressed me thus: {67} “Pray, Mr. Babbage, can you explain
to me in two words what is the principle of this machine?” Had the
querist possessed a moderate acquaintance with mathematics I might in
four words have conveyed to him the required information by answering,
“The method of differences.” The question might indeed have been
answered with six characters thus—

 Δ^{7 }_u__{_x_} = 0.

but such information would have been unintelligible to such inquirers.

On two occasions I have been asked,—“Pray, Mr. Babbage, if you put into
the machine wrong figures, will the right answers come out?” In one
case a member of the Upper, and in the other a member of the Lower,
House put this question. I am not able rightly to apprehend the kind of
confusion of ideas that could provoke such a question. I did, however,
explain the following property, which might in some measure approach
towards an answer to it.

It is possible to construct the Analytical Engine in such a manner
that after the question is once communicated to the engine, it may be
stopped at any turn of the handle and set on again as often as may be
desired. At each stoppage every figure-wheel throughout the Engine,
which is capable of being moved without breaking, may be moved on to
any other digit. Yet after each of these apparent falsifications the
engine will be found to make the next calculation with perfect truth.

The explanation is very simple, and the property itself useless. The
whole of the mechanism ought of course to be enclosed in glass, and
kept under lock and key, in which case the mechanism necessary to give
it the property alluded to would be useless.

{68}




CHAPTER VI.

Statement relative to the Difference Engine, drawn up by the late Sir
H. Nicolas from the Author’s Papers.


The following statement was drawn up by the late Sir Harris Nicolas,
G.S.M. & G., from papers and documents in my possession relating to the
Difference Engine. I believe every paper I possessed at all bearing on
the subject was in his hands for several months.

       *       *       *       *       *

For some time previous to 1822, Mr. Babbage had been engaged in
contriving machinery for the execution of extensive arithmetical
operations, and in devising mechanism by which the machine that made
the calculations might also print the results.

On the 3rd of July, 1822, he published a letter to Sir Humphry Davy,
President of the Royal Society, containing a statement of his views
on that subject; and more particularly describing an Engine for
calculating astronomical, nautical, and other Tables, by means of the
“method of differences.” In that letter it is stated that a small
Model, consisting of six figures, and capable of working two orders of
differences, had been constructed; and that it performed its work in a
satisfactory manner.

The concluding paragraph of that letter is as follows:—

 “Whether I shall construct a larger Engine of this kind, and bring
 to {69} perfection the others I have described, will, in a great
 measure, depend on the nature of the encouragement I may receive.

 “Induced, by a conviction of the great utility of such Engines, to
 withdraw, for some time, my attention from a subject on which it has
 been engaged during several years, and which possesses charms of
 a higher order, I have now arrived at a point where success is no
 longer doubtful. It must, however, be attained at a very considerable
 expense, which would not probably be replaced, by the works it might
 produce, for a long period of time; and which is an undertaking I
 should feel unwilling to commence, as altogether foreign to my habits
 and pursuits.”

The Model alluded to had been shown to a large number of Mr. Babbage’s
acquaintances, and to many other persons; and copies of his letter
having been given to several of his friends, it is probable that one of
the copies was sent to the Treasury.

On the 1st of April, 1823, the Lords of the Treasury referred that
Letter to the Royal Society, requesting—

 “The opinion of the Royal Society on the merits and utility of this
 invention.”

On the 1st of May the Royal Society reported to the Treasury, that—

 “Mr. Babbage has displayed great talent and ingenuity in the
 construction of his Machine for Computation, which the Committee
 think fully adequate to the attainment of the objects proposed by the
 inventor; and they consider Mr. Babbage as highly deserving of public
 encouragement, in the prosecution of his arduous undertaking.”[15]

On the 21st of May these papers were ordered to be printed by the House
of Commons.

In July, 1823, Mr. Babbage had an interview with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer (Mr. Robinson[16]), to ascertain if it was the wish of the
Government that he should construct a large Engine of the kind, which
would also print the results it calculated. {70}

     [15] Parliamentary Paper, No. 370, printed 22nd May, 1823.

     [16] Afterwards Lord Goderich, now Earl of Ripon.

From the conversation which took place on that occasion, Mr. Babbage
apprehended that such was the wish of the Government. The Chancellor of
the Exchequer remarked that the Government were in general unwilling
to make grants of money for any inventions, however meritorious;
because, if they really possessed the merit claimed for them, the
sale of the article produced would be the best, as well as largest
reward of the inventor: but that the present case was an _exception_;
it being apparent that the construction of such a Machine could not
be undertaken with a view to profit from the sale of its produce; and
that, as mathematical Tables were peculiarly valuable for nautical
purposes, it was deemed a fit object of encouragement by the Government.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer mentioned two modes of advancing
money for the construction:—either through the recommendation of a
Committee of the House of Commons, or by taking a sum from the Civil
Contingencies: and he observed that, as the Session of Parliament was
near its termination, the latter course might, perhaps, be the most
convenient.

Mr. Babbage thinks the Chancellor of the Exchequer also made some
observation, indicating that the amount of money taken from the Civil
Contingencies would be smaller than that which might be had by means
of a Committee of the House of Commons: and he then proposed to take
1,000 _l._ as a commencement from the Civil Contingencies Fund. To this
Mr. Babbage replied, in words which he distinctly remembers, “Would it
be too much, in the first instance, to take 1,500 _l._?” The Chancellor
of the Exchequer immediately answered, that 1,500 _l._ should be
advanced.

Mr. Babbage’s opinion at that time was, that the Engine would be
completed in two, or at the most in three years; and that by having
1,500 _l._ in the first instance, he would be {71} enabled to advance,
from his own private funds, the residue of the 3,000 _l._, or even
5,000 _l._, which he then imagined the Engine might possibly cost; so
that he would not again have occasion to apply to Government until it
was completed. Some observations were made by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer about the mode of accounting for the money received, as well
as about its expenditure; but it seemed to be admitted that it was not
possible to prescribe any very definite system, and that much must be
left to Mr. Babbage’s own judgment.

Very unfortunately, no Minute of that conversation was made at the
time, nor was any sufficiently distinct understanding between the
parties arrived at. Mr. Babbage’s conviction was, that whatever might
be the labour and difficulty of the undertaking, the Engine itself
would, of course, become the property of the Government, which had paid
for its construction.

Soon after this interview with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, a
letter was sent from the Treasury to the Royal Society, informing that
body that the Lords of the Treasury

 “Had directed the issue of 1,500 _l._ to Mr. Babbage, to enable him to
 bring his invention to perfection, in the manner recommended.”

These latter words, “_in the manner recommended_,” can only refer to
the previous recommendation of the Royal Society; but it does not
appear, from the Report of the Royal Society, that _any plan_, _terms_,
or _conditions_ had been pointed out by that body.

Towards the end of July, 1823, Mr. Babbage took measures for the
construction of the present _Difference Engine_,* and it was regularly
proceeded with for four years. {72}

     ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
     * NOTE.—It will be convenient to distinguish between—

       1. The small _Model_ of the original or Difference Engine.

       2. The _Difference_ Engine itself, belonging to the Government,
       a part only of which has been put together.

       3. The designs for another _Engine_, which in this Statement is
       called the Analytical Engine.

In October, 1827, the expense incurred had amounted to 3,475 _l._; and
Mr. Babbage having suffered severe domestic affliction, and being in
a very ill state of health, was recommended by his medical advisers
to travel on the Continent. He left, however, sufficient drawings to
enable the work to be continued, and gave an order to his own banker to
advance 1,000 _l._ during his absence: he also received, from time to
time, drawings and inquiries relating to the mechanism, and returned
instructions to the engineer who was constructing it.

As it now appeared probable that the expense would much exceed what
Mr. Babbage had originally anticipated, he thought it desirable to
inform the Government of that fact, and to procure a further grant.
As a preliminary step, he wrote from Italy to his brother-in-law, Mr.
Wolryche Whitmore, to request that he would see Lord Goderich upon the
subject of the interview in July, 1823; but it is probable that he did
not sufficiently inform Mr. Whitmore of all the circumstances of the
case.

Mr. Whitmore, having had some conversation with Lord Goderich on the
subject, addressed a letter, dated on the 29th of February, 1828, to
Mr. Babbage, who was then at Rome, stating that

 “That interview was unsatisfactory; that Lord Goderich did not like to
 admit that there was any understanding, at the time the 1,500 _l._ was
 advanced, that more would be given by Government.”

On Mr. Babbage’s return to England, towards the end of {73} 1828,
he waited in person upon Lord Goderich, who admitted that the
understanding of 1823 was not very definite. He then addressed a
statement to the Duke of Wellington, as the head of the Government,
explaining the previous steps in the affair; stating the reasons
for his inferences from what took place at the interview with the
Chancellor of the Exchequer in July, 1823; and referring his Grace for
further information to Lord Goderich, to whom also he sent a copy of
that statement.

The Duke of Wellington, in consequence of this application, requested
the Royal Society to inquire—

 “Whether the progress of the Machine confirms them in their former
 opinion, that it will ultimately prove adequate to the important
 object it was intended to attain.”

The Royal Society reported, in February, 1829, that—

 “They had not the slightest hesitation in pronouncing their decided
 opinion in the affirmative.”

The Royal Society also expressed their hope that—

 “Whilst Mr. Babbage’s mind is intensely occupied in an undertaking
 likely to do so much honour to his country, he may be relieved, as
 much as possible, from all other sources of anxiety.”

On the 28th of April, 1829, a Treasury Minute directed a further
payment to Mr. Babbage of

 “1,500 _l._ to enable him to complete the Machine by which such
 important benefit to Science might be expected.”

At that time the sum expended on the Engine amounted to 6,697 _l._
12 _s._, of which 3,000 _l._ had been received from the Treasury; so
that Mr. Babbage had provided 3,697 _l._ 12 _s._ from his own private
funds.

Under these circumstances, by the advice of Mr. Wolryche Whitmore, a
meeting of Mr. Babbage’s personal friends was held on the 12th of May,
1829. It consisted of— {74}

 THE DUKE OF SOMERSET,
 LORD ASHLEY,
 SIR JOHN FRANKLIN,
 MR. WOLRYCHE WHITMORE,
 DR. FITTON,
 MR. FRANCIS BAILY,
 MR. (now SIR JOHN) HERSCHEL.

Being satisfied, upon inquiry, of the following facts, they came to the
annexed resolutions:—

 “1st. That Mr. Babbage was originally induced to take up the work, on
 its present extensive scale, by an understanding on his part that it
 was the wish of Government that he should do so, and by an advance of
 1,500 _l._, at the outset; with a full impression on his mind, that
 such further advances would be made as the work might require.

 “2nd. That Mr. Babbage’s expenditure had amounted to nearly
 7,000 _l._, while the whole sum advanced by Government was 3,000 _l._

 “3rd. That Mr. Babbage had devoted the most assiduous and anxious
 attention to the progress of the Engine, to the injury of his health,
 and the neglect and refusal of other profitable occupations.

 “4th. That a very large expense remained to be incurred; and that
 his private fortune was not such as would justify his completing the
 Engine, without further and effectual assistance from Government.

 “5th. That a personal application upon the subject should be made to
 the Duke of Wellington.

 “6th. That if such application should be unsuccessful in procuring
 effectual and adequate assistance, they must regard Mr. Babbage
 (considering the great pecuniary and personal sacrifices he will then
 have made; the entire expenditure of all he had received from the
 public on the subject of its destination; and the moral certainty
 of completing it, to which it was, by his exertions, reduced) as no
 longer called on to proceed with an undertaking which might destroy
 his health, and injure, if not ruin, his fortune.

 “7th. That Mr. Wolryche Whitmore and Mr. Herschel should request an
 interview with the Duke of Wellington, to state to his Grace these
 opinions on the subject.”

Mr. Whitmore and Mr. Herschel accordingly had an interview with the
Duke of Wellington; and some time after they were informed by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, to whom they had applied for his Grace’s
answer, that the Duke of {75} Wellington intended to see the portion
of the Engine which had been then made.

In November, 1829, the Duke of Wellington, accompanied by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Goulburn) and Lord Ashley, saw the
_Model_ of the Engine, the drawings, and the parts in progress. On the
23rd of that month Mr. Babbage received a note from Mr. Goulburn, dated
on the 20th, informing him that the Duke of Wellington and himself
had recommended the Treasury to make a further payment towards the
completion of the Machine; and that their Lordships had in consequence
directed a payment of 3,000 _l._ to be made to him. This letter also
contained a suggestion about separating the Calculating from the
Printing part of the Machine, which was repeated in the letter from the
Treasury of the 3rd of December, 1829, communicating officially the
information contained in Mr. Goulburn’s private note, and stating that
directions had been given—

 “To pay to you the further sum of 3,000 _l._, to enable you to
 complete the Machine which you have invented for the calculation of
 various tables; but I have to intimate to you that, in making this
 additional payment, my Lords think it extremely desirable that the
 Machine should be so constructed, that, if any failure should take
 place in the attempt to print by it, the calculating part of the
 Machine may nevertheless be perfect and available for that object.”

Mr. Babbage inferred from this further grant, that Government had
adopted his view of the arrangement entered into with the Chancellor
of the Exchequer in July, 1823; but, to prevent the recurrence of
difficulty from any remaining indistinctness, he wrote to Mr. Goulburn,
stating that, before he received the 3,000 _l._, he wished to propose
some general arrangements for expediting the completion of the Engine,
further notes of which he would shortly submit to him. On the 25th
of November, 1829, he addressed a letter to Lord {76} Ashley, to be
communicated to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, stating the grounds on
which he thought the following arrangements desirable:—

1st. That the Engine should be considered as the property of Government.

2nd. That professional engineers should be appointed by Government to
examine the charges made for the work already executed, as well as
for its future progress; and that such charges should be defrayed by
Government.

3rd. That under this arrangement he himself should continue to direct
the construction of the Engine, as he had hitherto done.

Mr. Babbage also stated that he had been obliged to suspend the work
for nearly nine months; and that such delay risked the final completion
of the Engine.

In reply to these suggestions, Mr. Goulburn wrote to Lord Ashley,
stating—

 “That we (the Government) could not adopt the course which Mr.
 Babbage had pointed out, consistently with the principle on which we
 have rendered him assistance in the construction of his Machine, and
 without considerable inconvenience. The view of the Government was, to
 assist an able and ingenious man of science, whose zeal had induced
 him to exceed the limits of prudence, in the construction of a work
 which would, if successful, redound to his honour, and be of great
 public advantage. We feel ourselves, therefore, under the necessity of
 adhering to our original intention, as expressed in the Minute of the
 Treasury, which granted Mr. Babbage the last 3,000 _l._, and in the
 letter in which I informed him of that grant.”

Mr. Goulburn’s letter was enclosed by Lord Ashley to Mr. Babbage,
with a note, in which his Lordship observed, with reference to Mr.
Goulburn’s opinion, that it was

 “A wrong view of the position in which Mr. Babbage was placed, after
 his conference with Lord Goderich—which must be explained to him (Mr.
 Goulburn).” {77}

“_The original intention_” of the Government is here stated to have
been communicated to Mr. Babbage, both in the letter from the Treasury
of the 3rd of December, 1829, granting the 3,000 _l._, and also in Mr.
Goulburn’s private letter of the 20th of November, 1829. These letters
have been just given; and it certainly does not appear from either
of them, that the “original intention” was then in any degree more
apparent than it was at the commencement of the undertaking in July,
1823.

On the 16th of December, 1829, Mr. Babbage wrote to Lord Ashley,
observing, that Mr. Goulburn seemed to think that he [Mr. Babbage]
had commenced the machine on his own account; and that, pursuing it
zealously, he had expended more than was prudent, and had then applied
to Government for aid. He remarked, that a reference to papers and
dates would confirm his own positive declaration, that this was never
for one moment, in _his_ apprehension, the ground on which the matter
rested; and that the following facts would prove that it was absolutely
impossible it could have been so:—

1stly. Mr. Babbage referred to the passage[17] (already quoted) in his
letter to Sir Humphry Davy, in which he had expressed his opinion as
_decidedly adverse_ to the plan of making a larger Machine, on his own
account.

2ndly. Mr. Babbage stated that the small Model of the Machine seen by
the Duke of Wellington and Mr. Goulburn, was completed _before_ his
interview with Lord Goderich in July, 1823; for it was alluded to in
the Report of the Royal Society, of the 1st of May, 1823.

3rdly. That the interview with Lord Goderich having taken place in
July, 1823; the present Machine (_i.e._ the _Difference_ {78} Engine)
was commenced in _consequence_ of that interview; and _after_ Mr.
Babbage had received the first grant of 1,500 _l._ on the 7th of
August, 1823.

     [17] See page 69.

Having thus shown that the light in which Mr. Goulburn viewed these
transactions was founded on a misconception, Mr. Babbage requested
Lord Ashley to inquire whether the facts to which he had called Mr.
Goulburn’s attention might not induce him to reconsider the subject.
And in case Mr. Goulburn should decline revising his opinion, then he
wished Lord Ashley to ascertain the opinion of Government, upon the
contingent questions which he enclosed; viz.—

 1. Supposing Mr. Babbage received the 3,000 _l._ now directed to be
 issued, what are the claims which Government will have on the Engine,
 or on himself?

 2. Would Mr. Babbage owe the 6,000 _l._, or any part of that sum to
 the Government?

 If this question be answered in the negative,

 3. Is the portion of the Engine now made, as completely Mr. Babbage’s
 property as if it had been entirely paid for with his own money?

 4. Is it expected by Government that Mr. Babbage should continue to
 construct the Engine at his own private expense; and, if so, to what
 extent in money?

 5. Supposing Mr. Babbage should decline resuming the construction of
 the Engine, to whom do the drawings and parts already made belong?

The following statement was also enclosed:—


 Expenses up to 9th May, 1829, when the work ceased           [18]£6,628
 Two grants of 1,500 _l._ each, amounting to            £3,000
 By Treasury Minute, Nov. 1829, but not yet received    3,000
                                                       ──────      6,000
                                                                  ──────
                                                                    £628
                                                                  ══════

     [18] The difference between this sum and 6,697 _l._ 12 _s._
     mentioned in page 73, seems to have arisen from the fact of the
     former sum having included the estimated amount of a bill which,
     when received, was found to be less than had been anticipated.

In January, 1830, Mr. Babbage wrote to Lord Goderich, {79} stating
that the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Goulburn) would probably
apply to his Lordship respecting the interview in July, 1823. He
therefore recalled some of the circumstances attending it to Lord
Goderich, and concluded thus:—

 “The matter was, as you have justly observed on another occasion,
 left, in a certain measure, indefinite; and I have never contended
 that any promise was made to me. My subsequent conduct was founded
 upon the impression left on my mind by that interview. I always
 considered that, whatever difficulties I might encounter, it could
 never happen that I should ultimately suffer any pecuniary loss.

 “I understand that Mr. Goulburn wishes to ascertain from your Lordship
 whether, from the nature of that interview, it was reasonable that I
 should have such expectation.”

In the mean time Mr. Babbage had encountered difficulties of another
kind. The Engineer who had been constructing the Engine under Mr.
Babbage’s direction had delivered his bills in such a state that it
was impossible to judge how far the charges were just and reasonable;
and although Mr. Babbage had paid several thousand pounds, yet there
remained a considerable balance, which he was quite prepared and
willing to pay, as soon as the accounts should be examined, and the
charges approved of by professional engineers.

The delay in deciding whether the Engine was the property of
Government, added greatly to this embarrassment. Mr. Babbage,
therefore, wrote to Lord Ashley on the 8th of February, to mention
these difficulties; and to point out the serious inconvenience which
would arise, in the future progress of the Engine, from any dispute
between the Engineer and himself relative to payments.

On the 24th of February, 1830, Mr. Babbage called on Lord Ashley, to
request he would represent to the Duke of Wellington the facts of the
case, and point out to his Grace {80} the importance of a decision.
In the afternoon of the same day, he again saw Lord Ashley, who
communicated to him the decision of the Government; to the following
effect:—

1 _st._ _Although the Government would not pledge themselves to_
COMPLETE _the Machine, they were willing to declare it their property_.

2 _nd._ _That professional Engineers should be appointed to examine the
bills._

3 _rd._ _That the Government were willing to advance_ 3,000 _l._ _more
than the sum_ (6,000 _l._) _already granted_.

4 _th._ _That, when the Machine was completed, the Government would be
willing to attend to any claim of Mr. Babbage to remuneration, either
by bringing it before the Treasury, or the House of Commons._

Thus, after considerable discussion, the doubts arising from the
indefiniteness of the understanding with the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, in July, 1823, were at length removed. Mr. Babbage’s
impression of the original arrangement entered into between Lord
Goderich and himself was thus formally adopted in the first three
propositions: and the Government voluntarily added the expression of
their disposition to attend to any claim of his for remuneration when
the Engine should be completed.

When the arrangements consequent upon this decision were made, the work
of the Engine was resumed, and continued to advance.

After some time, the increasing amount of costly drawings, and of parts
of the Engine already executed, remaining exposed to destruction from
fire and from other casualties became a source of some anxiety.

These facts having been represented to Lord Althorp (then Chancellor
of the Exchequer), an experienced surveyor {81} was directed to find
a site adapted for a building for the reception of the Engine in the
neighbourhood of Mr. Babbage’s residence.

On the 19th of January the Surveyor’s reports were forwarded to Lord
Althorp (the Chancellor of the Exchequer), who referred the case to
a committee of practical Engineers for their opinion. This committee
reported strongly in favour of the removal, on the grounds of security,
and of economy in completing the Engine; and also recommended the site
which had been previously selected by the Surveyor. The Royal Society,
also, to whom Lord Althorp had applied, examined the question, and
likewise reported strongly to the same effect.

A lease of some property, adjacent to Mr. Babbage’s residence,
was therefore subsequently granted by him to the Government; and
a fire-proof building, capable of containing the Engine, with its
drawings, and workshops necessary for its completion, were erected.

With respect to the expenses of constructing the Engine, the following
plan was agreed upon and carried out:—The great bulk of the work was
executed by the Engineer under the direction of Mr. Babbage. When
the bills were sent in, they were immediately forwarded by him to
two eminent Engineers, Messrs. Donkin and Field, who, at the request
of Government, had undertaken to examine their accuracy. On these
gentlemen certifying those bills to be correct, Mr. Babbage transmitted
them to the Treasury; and after the usual forms, a warrant was
issued directing the payment of the respective sums to Mr. Babbage.
This course, however, required considerable time; and the Engineer
having represented that he was unable to pay his workmen without more
immediate advances, Mr. Babbage, to prevent delay in {82} completing
the Engine, did himself, from time to time, advance from his own funds
several sums of money; so that he was, in fact, usually in advance from
500 _l._ to 1,000 _l._ Those sums were, of course, repaid when the
Treasury warrants were issued.

Early in the year 1833, an event of great importance in the history
of the Engine occurred. Mr. Babbage had directed a portion of it,
consisting of sixteen figures, to be put together. It was capable
of calculating Tables having two or three orders of differences;
and, to some extent, of forming other Tables. The action of this
portion completely justified the expectations raised, and gave a most
satisfactory assurance of its final success.

The fire-proof building and workshops having been completed,
arrangements were made for the removal of the Engine. Mr. Babbage
finding it no longer convenient to make payments in advance, informed
the Engineer that he should in future not pay him until the money
was received from the Treasury. Upon receiving this intimation, the
Engineer immediately discontinued the construction of the Engine,
and dismissed the workmen employed on it; which fact Mr. Babbage
immediately communicated to the Treasury.

In this state of affairs it appeared, both to the Treasury and to
Mr. Babbage, that it would be better to complete the removal of the
drawings, and all the parts of the Engine to the fire-proof building;
and then make such arrangements between the Treasury and the Engineer,
respecting the future payments, as might prevent further discussion on
that subject.

After much delay and difficulty the whole of the drawings, and parts
of the Engine, were at length removed to the fire-proof building in
East-street, Manchester-square. Mr. Babbage wrote, on the 16th of
July, 1834, to the Treasury, {83} informing their Lordships of the
fact;—adding that no advance had been made in its construction for
above a year and a quarter; and requesting further instructions on the
subject.

Mr. Babbage received a letter from the Treasury, expressing their
Lordships’ satisfaction at learning that the drawings, and parts of the
Calculating Engine were removed to the fire-proof building, and stating
that as soon as Mr. Clement’s Accounts should be received and examined,
they would

 “Take into consideration what further proceedings may be requisite
 with a view to its completion.”

A few weeks afterwards Mr. Babbage received a letter from the Treasury,
conveying their Lordships’ authority to proceed with the construction
of the Engine.

During the time which had elapsed since the Engineer had ceased to
proceed with the construction of the Engine, Mr. Babbage had been
deprived of the use of his own drawings. Having, in the meanwhile,
naturally speculated upon the general principles on which machinery
for calculation might be constructed, _a principle of an entirely new
kind_ occurred to him, the power of which over the most complicated
arithmetical operations seemed nearly unbounded. On re-examining his
drawings when returned to him by the Engineer, the new principle
appeared to be limited only by the extent of the mechanism it
might require. The invention of simpler mechanical means for
executing the elementary operations of the Engine now derived a far
greater importance than it had hitherto possessed; and should such
simplifications be discovered, it seemed difficult to anticipate, or
even to over-estimate, the vast results which might be attained. In the
Engine for calculating by differences, such simplifications affected
only about a hundred and twenty {84} similar parts, whilst in the new
or _Analytical_ Engine, they would affect a great many thousand. The
_Difference_ Engine might be constructed with more or less advantage
by employing various mechanical modes for the operation of addition:
the _Analytical_ Engine could not _exist_ without inventing for it a
method of mechanical addition possessed of the utmost simplicity. In
fact, it was not until upwards of twenty different mechanical modes for
performing the operation of addition had been designed and drawn, that
the necessary degree of simplicity required for the Analytical Engine
was ultimately attained. Hence, therefore, the powerful motive for
simplification.

These new views acquired additional importance, from their bearings
upon the Engine already partly executed for the Government. For,
if such simplifications should be discovered, it might happen that
the _Analytical_ Engine would execute more rapidly the calculations
for which the _Difference_ Engine was intended; or, that the
_Difference_ Engine would itself be superseded by a far simpler mode of
construction. Though these views might, perhaps, at that period have
appeared visionary, both have subsequently been completely realized.

To withhold those new views from the Government, and under such
circumstances to have allowed the construction of the Engine to be
resumed, would have been improper; yet the state of uncertainty in
which those views were then necessarily involved rendered any _written_
communication respecting their probable bearing on the Difference
Engine a matter of very great difficulty. It appeared to Mr. Babbage
that the most straightforward course was to ask for an interview on the
subject with the Head of the Government, and to communicate to him the
exact state of the case. {85}

Had that interview taken place, the First Lord of the Treasury might
have ascertained from his inquiries, in a manner quite impracticable
by any written communications, the degree of importance which Mr.
Babbage attached to his new inventions, and his own opinion of their
probable effect, in superseding the whole or any part of the original,
or _Difference_, Engine. The First Lord of the Treasury would then have
been in a position to decide, either on the immediate continuation and
completion of the original design, or on its temporary suspension,
until the character of the new views should be more fully developed by
further drawings and examination.

There was another, although a far less material point, on which also
it was desirable to obtain the opinion of the Government: the serious
impediments to the progress of the Engine, arising from the Engineer’s
conduct, as well as the consequent great expense, had induced Mr.
Babbage to consider, whether it might not be possible to employ some
other person as his agent for constructing it. His mind had gradually
become convinced of the practicability of that measure; but he was also
aware that however advantageous it might prove to the Government, from
its greater economy, yet that it would add greatly to his own personal
labour, responsibility, and anxiety.

On the 26th of September, 1834, Mr. Babbage therefore requested an
interview with Lord Melbourne, for the purpose of placing before him
these views. Lord Melbourne acceded to the proposed interview, but it
was then postponed; and soon after, the Administration of which his
Lordship was the Head went out of Office, without the interview having
taken place.

For the same purpose, Mr. Babbage applied in December, {86} 1834, for
an interview with the Duke of Wellington, who, in reply, expressed his
wish to receive a written communication on the subject. He accordingly
addressed a statement to his Grace, pointing out the only plans which,
in his opinion, could be pursued for terminating the questions relative
to the _Difference_ Engine; namely,

1st. The Government might desire Mr. Babbage to continue the
construction of the Engine, in the hands of the person who has hitherto
been employed in making it.

2ndly. The Government might wish to know whether any other person could
be substituted for the Engineer at present employed to continue the
construction;—a course which was possible.

3rdly. The Government might (although he did not presume that they
would) substitute some person to superintend the completion of the
Engine instead of Mr. Babbage himself.

4thly. The Government might be disposed to give up the undertaking
entirely.

He also stated to the Duke of Wellington, the circumstances which had
led him to the invention of a _new_ Engine, of far more extensive
powers of calculation; which he then observed did not supersede the
former one, but added greatly to its utility.

At this period, the impediments relating to the _Difference_ Engine had
been partially and temporarily removed. The chief difficulty would have
been either the formation of new arrangements with the Engineer, or
the appointment of some other person to supply his place. This latter
alternative, which was of great importance for economy as well as for
its speedy completion, Mr. Babbage had carefully examined, and was then
prepared to point out means for its accomplishment. {87}

The duration of the Duke of Wellington’s Administration was short; and
no decision on the subject of the _Difference_ Engine was obtained.

On the 15th of May the _Difference_ Engine was alluded to in the House
of Commons; when the Chancellor of the Exchequer did Mr. Babbage the
justice to state distinctly, that the whole of the money voted had
been expended in paying the workmen and for the materials employed in
constructing it, and that not one shilling of it had ever gone into his
own pocket.

About this time several communications took place between the
Chancellor of the Exchequer and Mr. Babbage, respecting a reference to
the Royal Society for an opinion on the subject of the Engine.

       *       *       *       *       *

A new and serious impediment to the possibility of executing one of the
plans which had been suggested to the Duke of Wellington for completing
the _Difference_ Engine arose from these delays. The draftsman whom Mr.
Babbage had, at his own expense, employed, both on the _Difference_ and
on the _Analytical_ Engine, received an offer of a very liberal salary,
if he would enter into an engagement abroad, which would occupy many
years. His assistance was indispensable, and his services were retained
only by Mr. Babbage considerably increasing his salary.

On the 14th of January, 1836, Mr. Babbage received a communication
from the Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Spring Rice[19]), expressing
his desire to come to some definite result on the subject of the
Calculating Engine, in which he remarked, that the conclusion to be
drawn from Mr. Babbage’s statement to the Duke of Wellington was, that
he {88} (Mr. Babbage) having invented a new machine, of far greater
powers than the former one, wished to be informed if the Government
would undertake to defray the expense of this _new_ Engine.

     [19] The present Lord Monteagle.

The Chancellor of the Exchequer then pointed out reasons why he should
feel himself bound to look to the completion of the first machine,
before he could propose to Parliament to enter on the consideration of
the second: and he proposed to refer to the Royal Society for their
opinion, authorizing them, if they thought fit, to employ any practical
mechanist or engineer to assist them in their inquiries. The Chancellor
of the Exchequer concluded with expressing his readiness to communicate
with Mr. Babbage respecting the best mode of attaining that result.

From these statements it is evident that Mr. Babbage had failed in
making his own views distinctly understood by the Chancellor of
the Exchequer. His first anxiety, when applying to Lord Melbourne,
had been respecting the question, whether the _Discoveries_ with
which he was then advancing might not ultimately supersede the work
already executed. His second object had been to point out a possible
arrangement, by which great expense might be saved in the mechanical
construction of the _Difference_ Engine.

So far was Mr. Babbage from having proposed to the Government to defray
the expenses of the _new_ or _Analytical_ Engine, that though he
expressly pointed out in the statement to the Duke of Wellington[20]
four courses which it was possible for the Government to take,—yet in
no one of them was the construction of the _new_ Engine alluded to.

     [20] See page 86.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those views of improved machinery for making calculations {89}
which had appeared in but faint perspective in 1834, as likely to
lead to important consequences, had, by this time, assumed a form
and distinctness which fully justified the anticipations then made.
By patient inquiry, aided by extensive drawings and notations, the
projected _Analytical_ Engine had acquired such powers, that it became
necessary, for its further advancement, to simplify the elements of
which it was composed. In the progress of this inquiry, Mr. Babbage
had gradually arrived at simpler mechanical modes of performing those
arithmetical operations on which the action of the _Difference_
Engine depended; and he felt it necessary to communicate these new
circumstances, as well as their consequences, to the Chancellor of the
Exchequer.

On the 20th of January, 1836, Mr. Babbage wrote, in answer to the
communication from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, that he did not,
on re-examining the statement addressed to the Duke of Wellington,
perceive that it contained _any application to take up the new or
Analytical Engine_; and he accompanied this reply by a statement
relative to the progress of the _Analytical_ Engine, and its bearing
upon the _Difference_ Engine belonging to the Government. The former,
it was said,

 “Is not only capable of accomplishing all those other complicated
 calculations which I had intended, but it also performs all
 calculations which were peculiar to the Difference Engine, both in
 less time, and to a greater extent: in fact, it completely supersedes
 the Difference Engine.”

The Reply then referred to the statement laid before the Duke of
Wellington in July, 1834, in which it was said,

 “That all the elements of the Analytical were essentially different
 from those of the Difference Engine;”

and that the mechanical simplicity to which its elements had now been
reduced was such, that it would probably cost more {90} to finish
the _old Difference_ Engine on its original plan than to construct a
_new_ Difference Engine with the simplified elements devised for the
_Analytical_ Engine.

It then proceeded to state that—

 “The fact of a _new_ superseding an _old_ machine, in a very few
 years, is one of constant occurrence in our manufactories; and
 instances might be pointed out in which the advance of invention
 has been so rapid, and the demand for machinery so great, that
 half-finished machines have been thrown aside as useless before their
 completion.

 “It is now nearly fourteen years since I undertook for the Government
 to superintend the making of the Difference Engine. During nearly four
 years its construction has been absolutely stopped, and, instead of
 being employed in overcoming the physical impediments, I have been
 harassed by what may be called the moral difficulties of the question.
 It is painful to reflect that, in the time so employed, the first
 Difference Engine might, under more favourable circumstances, have
 been completed.

 “In making this Report, I wish distinctly to state, that I do not
 entertain the slightest doubt of the success of the Difference
 Engine; _nor do I intend it as any application to finish the one or
 to construct the other_; but I make it from a conviction that the
 information it contains ought to be communicated to those who must
 decide the question relative to the Difference Engine.”

The reference to the Royal Society, proposed by the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, in his letter of the 14th of January, 1836,[21] did not
take place; and during more than a year and a half no further measures
appear to have been adopted by the Government respecting the Engine.

     [21] See page 88.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was obviously of the greatest importance to Mr. Babbage that a
final decision should be made by the Government. When he undertook
to superintend the construction of the _Difference_ Engine for the
Government, it was, of course, understood that he would not leave it
unfinished. He had now been engaged fourteen years upon an object which
he {91} had anticipated would not require more than two or three; and
there seemed no limit to the time his engagement with the Government
might thus be supposed to endure, unless some steps were taken to
terminate it. Without such a decision Mr. Babbage felt that he should
be impeded in any plans he might form, and liable to the most serious
interruption, if he should venture to enter upon the execution of them.
He therefore most earnestly pressed, both by his personal applications
and by those of his friends, for the settlement of the question. Mr.
Wolryche Whitmore, in particular, repeatedly urged upon the Chancellor
of the Exchequer, personally, as well as by letter, the injustice of
keeping Mr. Babbage so very long in a state of suspense.

Time, however, passed on, and during nearly two years the question
remained in the same state. Mr. Babbage, wearied with this delay,
determined upon making a last effort to obtain a decision. He wrote
to the First Lord of the Treasury (Lord Melbourne) on the 26th of
July, 1838, recalling to his Lordship’s attention the frequency of
his applications on this subject, and urging the necessity of a final
decision upon it. He observed, that if the question had become more
difficult, because he had invented superior mechanism, which had
superseded that which was already partly executed, this consequence
had arisen from the very delay against which he had so repeatedly
remonstrated. He then asked, for the last time, not for any favour, but
for that which it was an injustice to withhold—a decision.

On the 16th of August Mr. Spring Rice (the Chancellor of the Exchequer)
addressed a note to Mr. Babbage, in reference to his application to
Lord Melbourne. After recapitulating his former statement of the
subject, which had been shown to be founded on a misapprehension, viz.,
that Mr. Babbage {92} had made an _application_ to the Government
to construct for them the _Analytical_ Engine, the Chancellor of
the Exchequer inquired whether he was solicitous that steps should
be taken for the completion of the old, or for the commencement of
a new machine,—and what he considered would be the cost of the one
proceeding, and of the other?

Being absent on a distant journey, Mr. Babbage could not reply to this
note until the 21st of October. He then reminded the Chancellor of
the Exchequer of his previous communication of the 20th of January,
1836 (see p. 89), in which it was expressly stated that he did _not_
intend to make any application to construct a _new_ machine; but that
the communication to the Duke of Wellington and the one to himself
were made, simply because he thought it would be unfair to conceal
such important facts from those who were called upon to decide on the
continuance or discontinuance of the construction of the _Difference
Engine_.

With respect to the expense of either of the courses pointed out by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Babbage observed that, not being a
professional Engineer, and his past experience having taught him not to
rely upon his own judgment on matters of that nature, he should be very
reluctant to offer any opinion upon the subject.

In conclusion, Mr. Babbage stated that the question he wished to have
settled was—

_Whether the Government required him to superintend the completion of
the Difference Engine, which had been suspended during the last five
years, according to the original plan and principles; or whether they
intended to discontinue it altogether?_

In November, 1841, Mr. Babbage, on his return from the Continent,
finding that Sir Robert Peel had become First {93} Lord of the
Treasury, determined upon renewing his application for a decision of
the question. With this view the previous pages of this Statement were
drawn up, and a copy of it was forwarded to him, accompanied by a
letter from Mr. Babbage, in which he observed—

 “Of course, when I undertook to give the invention of the Calculating
 Engine to the Government, and to superintend its construction, there
 must have been an implied understanding that I should carry it on to
 its termination. I entered upon that understanding, believing that
 two or at the utmost that three years would complete it. The better
 part of my life has now been spent on that machine, and no progress
 whatever having been made since 1834, that understanding may possibly
 be considered by the Government as still subsisting: I am therefore
 naturally very anxious that this state of uncertainty should be put an
 end to as soon as possible.”

Mr. Babbage, in reply, received a note from Sir George Clerk (Secretary
to the Treasury), stating that Sir Robert Peel feared that it would not
be in his power to turn his attention to the subject for some days, but
that he hoped, as soon as the great pressure of business previous to
the opening of the session of Parliament was over, he might be able to
determine on the best course to be pursued.

The session of Parliament closed in August, and Mr. Babbage had
received no further communication on the subject. Having availed
himself of several private channels for recalling the question to Sir
Robert Peel’s attention without effect, Mr. Babbage, on the 8th of
October, 1842, again wrote to him, requesting an early decision.

On the 4th of November, 1842, a note from Sir Robert Peel explained to
Mr. Babbage that some delay had arisen, from his wish to communicate
personally with the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who would shortly
announce to him their joint conclusion on the subject.

On the same day Mr. Babbage received a letter from Mr. {94} Goulburn
(the Chancellor of the Exchequer), who stated that he had communicated
with Sir Robert Peel, and that they both regretted the necessity of
abandoning the completion of a machine, on which so much scientific
labour had been bestowed. He observed, that the expense necessary for
rendering it either satisfactory to Mr. Babbage or generally useful
appeared, on the lowest calculation, so far to exceed what they should
be justified in incurring, that they considered themselves as having no
other alternative.

Mr. Goulburn concluded by expressing their hope, that by the Government
withdrawing all claim to the machine as already constructed, and
placing it entirely at Mr. Babbage’s disposal, they might in some
degree assist him in his future exertions in the cause of Science.

On the 6th of November, 1842, Mr. Babbage wrote to Sir Robert Peel
and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, acknowledging the receipt of
their decision, thanking them for the offer of the machine as already
constructed, but, under all the circumstances, declining to accept
it.[22]

     [22] The part of the _Difference_ Engine already constructed,
     together with all the Drawings relating to the whole machine,
     were, in January, 1843 (by the direction of the Government),
     deposited in the Museum of King’s College, London.

On the 11th of November Mr. Babbage obtained an interview with Sir
Robert Peel, and stated, that having given the original Invention to
the Government—having superintended for them its construction—having
demonstrated the possibility of the undertaking by the completion
of an important portion of it—and that the non-completion of the
design arose neither from his fault nor his desire, but was the act
of the Government itself, he felt that he had some claims on their
consideration.

He rested those claims upon the sacrifices he had made, {95} both
personal and pecuniary, in the advancement of the Mechanical Arts and
of Science—on the anxiety and the injury he had experienced by the
delay of eight years in the decision of the Government on the subject,
and on the great annoyance he had constantly been exposed to by the
prevailing belief in the public mind that he had been amply remunerated
by large grants of public money. Nothing, he observed, but some public
act of the Government could ever fully refute that opinion, or repair
the injustice with which he had been treated.

The result of this interview was entirely unsatisfactory. Mr. Babbage
went to it prepared, had his statement produced any effect, to have
pointed out two courses, by either of which it was probable that
not only a Difference Engine, but even the Analytical Engine, might
in a few years have been completed. The state of Sir Robert Peel’s
information on the subject, and the views he took of Mr. Babbage’s
services and position, prevented Mr. Babbage from making any allusion
to either of those plans.

Thus finally terminated an engagement, which had existed upwards of
twenty years. During no part of the last eight of those years does
there appear to have been any reason why the same decision should
not have been arrived at by the Government as was at last actually
pronounced.

It was during this last period that all the great principles on which
the _Analytical_ Engine rests were discovered, and that the mechanical
contrivances in which they might be embodied were invented. The
establishment which Mr. Babbage had long maintained in his own house,
and at his own expense, was now directed with increased energy to the
new inquiries required for its perfection.

In this Statement the heavy sacrifices, both pecuniary and {96}
personal, which the invention of these machines has entailed upon
their author, have been alluded to as slightly as possible. Few can
imagine, and none will ever know their full extent. Some idea of
those sacrifices must nevertheless have occurred to every one who has
read this Statement. During upwards of twenty years Mr. Babbage has
employed, in his own house, and at his own expense, workmen of various
kinds, to assist him in making experiments necessary for attaining a
knowledge of every art which could possibly tend to the perfection
of those Engines; and with that object he has frequently visited the
manufactories of the Continent, as well as our own.

Since the discontinuance of the Difference Engine belonging to the
Government, Mr. Babbage has himself maintained an establishment for
making drawings and descriptions demonstrating the nature and power
of the _Analytical_ Engine, and for its construction at some future
period, when its value may be appreciated.

To these remarks it will only be added, that at an early stage of the
construction of the _Difference_ Engine he refused more than one highly
desirable and profitable situation, in order that he might give his
whole time and thoughts to the fulfilment of the engagement which he
considered himself to have entered into with the Government.

 _August, 1843._

{97}




CHAPTER VII.

DIFFERENCE ENGINE NO. II.


 Difference Engine No. 2 — The Earl of Rosse, President of the Royal
 Society, proposed to the Government a Plan by which the Difference
 Engine No. 2 might have been executed — It was addressed to the Earl
 of Derby, and rejected by his Chancellor of the Exchequer.

It was not until 1848, when I had mastered the subject of the
Analytical Engine, that I resolved on making a complete set of drawings
of the Difference Engine No. 2. In this I proposed to take advantage of
all the improvements and simplifications which years of unwearied study
had produced for the Analytical Engine.

In 1852, the Earl of Rosse, who, from its commencement, had looked
forward with the greatest interest to the application of mechanism to
purposes of calculation, and who was well acquainted with the drawings
and notations of the Difference Engine No. 2, inquired of me whether
I was willing to give them to the Government, provided they would
have the Engine constructed. My feeling was, after the sad experience
of the past, that I ought not to think of sacrificing any further
portion of my life upon the subject. If, however, they chose to have
the Difference Engine made, I was ready to give them the whole of the
drawings, and also the notations by which it was demonstrated that such
a machine could be constructed, and that when made it would necessarily
do the work prescribed for it. {98}

My much-valued friend, the late Sir Benjamin Hawes, had also been
consulted, and it was agreed that the draft of a letter to Lord Derby,
who was then prime minister, should be prepared; in which I should make
this offer. Lord Rosse proposed to place my letter in Lord Derby’s
hands, with his own statement of a plan by which the whole question
might be determined.

Lord Rosse’s suggestion was, that the Government should apply to the
President of the Institution of Civil Engineers to ascertain,

 1st. Whether it was possible, from the drawings and notations, to make
 an estimate of the cost of constructing the machine?

 2ndly. In case this question was answered in the affirmative—then,
 could a Mechanical Engineer be found who would undertake to construct
 it, and at what expense?

The Institution of Civil Engineers was undoubtedly the highest
authority upon the first question. That being decided in the
affirmative, no other body had equal power to find out those mechanical
engineers who might be willing to undertake the contract.

Supposing both these questions, or even the latter only, answered in
the negative, the proposition, of course, fell to the ground. But if
they were both answered in the affirmative, then there would have
arisen a further question for the consideration of the Government:
namely, Whether the object to be obtained was worthy of the expenditure?

〈LORD ROSSE’S ADDRESS TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.〉

The final result of this eminently _practical_ plan was communicated
to the Royal Society by their President, in his address at their
anniversary on the 30th November, 1854. The following is an extract:—
{99}

 “The progress of the work was suspended: there was a change of
 Government. Science was weighed against gold by a new standard, and
 it was resolved to proceed no further. No enterprise could have had
 its beginning under more auspicious circumstances: the Government
 had taken the initiative—they had called for advice, and the adviser
 was the highest scientific authority in this country;—your Council;
 guided by such men as Davy, Wollaston, and Herschel. By your Council
 the undertaking was inaugurated,—by your Council it was watched over
 in its progress. That the first great effort to employ the powers of
 calculating mechanism, in aid of the human intellect, should have been
 suffered in this great country to expire fruitless, because there
 was no tangible evidence of immediate profit, as a British subject I
 deeply regret, and as a Fellow my regret is accompanied with feelings
 of bitter disappointment. Where a question has once been disposed of,
 succeeding Governments rarely reopen it, still I thought I should
 not be doing my duty if I did not take some opportunity of bringing
 the facts once more before Government. Circumstances had changed,
 mechanical engineering had made much progress; the tools required
 and trained workmen were to be found in the workshops of the leading
 mechanists, the founder’s art was so advanced that casting had
 been substituted for cutting, in making the change wheels, even of
 screw-cutting engines, and therefore it was very probable that persons
 would be found willing to undertake to complete the Difference Engine
 for a specific sum.

 “That finished, the question would then have arisen, how far it was
 advisable to endeavour, by the same means, to turn to account the
 great labour which had been expended under the guidance of inventive
 powers the most original, {100} controlled by mathematics of a very
 high order; and which had been wholly devoted for so many years to
 the great task of carrying the powers of calculating machinery to
 its utmost limits. Before I took any step I wrote to several very
 eminent men of science, inquiring whether, in their opinion, any
 great scientific object would be gained if Mr. Babbage’s views, as
 explained in Ménabrèa’s little essay, were completely realized.
 The answers I received were strongly in the affirmative. As it was
 necessary the subject should be laid before Government in a form as
 practical as possible, I wrote to one of our most eminent mechanical
 engineers to inquire whether I should be safe in stating to Government
 that the expense of the Calculating Engine had been more than repaid
 in the improvements in mechanism directly referable to it; he
 replied,—unquestionably. Fortified by these opinions, I submitted this
 proposition to Government:—that they should call upon the President
 of the Society of Civil Engineers to report whether it would be
 practicable to make a contract for the completion of Mr. Babbage’s
 Difference Engine, and if so, for what sum. This was in 1852, during
 the short administration of Lord Derby, and it led to no result. The
 time was unfortunate; a great political contest was impending, and
 before there was a lull in politics, so that the voice of Science
 could be heard, Lord Derby’s government was at an end.”

〈MR. BABBAGE’S LETTER TO THE EARL OF DERBY.〉

The following letter was then drawn up, and placed in Lord Derby’s
hands by Lord Rosse:—

 MY LORD,      _June 8, 1852_.

I TAKE the liberty of drawing your Lordship’s attention to the subject
of the construction of a Difference Engine, for {101} calculating and
printing Astronomical and Nautical Tables, which was brought under the
notice of the Government so far back as the year 1823, and upon which
the Government of that day desired the opinion of the Royal Society.

I annex a copy of the correspondence which took place at that time, and
which your Lordship will observe was laid before Parliament.

The Committee of the Royal Society, to which the subject was referred,
reported generally that the invention was one “fully adequate to the
attainment of the objects proposed by the inventor, and that they
considered Mr. Babbage as highly deserving of public encouragement in
the prosecution of his arduous undertaking.”—_Report of Royal Society_,
1 _st_ _May_, 1823. _Parliamentary Paper_, 370, 22 _nd_ _May_, 1823.

And in a subsequent and more detailed Report, which I annex also, they
state:—

“The Committee have no intention of entering into any consideration
of the abstract mathematical principle on which the practicability of
such a machine as Mr. Babbage’s relies, nor of its public utility when
completed. They consider the former as not only sufficiently clear in
itself, but as already admitted and acted on by the Council in their
former proceedings. The latter they regard as obvious to every one who
considers the immense advantage of accurate numerical Tables in all
matters of calculation, especially in those which relate to Astronomy
and Navigation, and the great variety and extent of those which it is
the object and within the compass of Mr. Babbage’s Engine to calculate
and print with perfect accuracy.”—_Report of Committee of Royal
Society, 12th Feb., 1829._

Upon the first of these Reports, the Government determined to construct
the machine, under my personal {102} superintendence and direction.
The Engine was accordingly commenced and partially completed. Tables of
figures were calculated, limited in extent only by the number of wheels
put together.

Delays, from various causes arose in the progress of the work, and
great expenses were incurred. The machine was altogether new in design
and construction, and required the utmost mechanical skill which could
be obtained for its execution. “It involved,” to quote again from
the Report of the Committee of the Royal Society, “the necessity of
constructing, and in many instances inventing, tools and machinery
of great expense and complexity (and in many instances of ingenious
contrivances likely to prove useful for other purposes hereafter), for
forming with the requisite precision parts of the apparatus dissimilar
to any used in ordinary mechanical works; that of making many previous
trials to ascertain the validity of proposed movements; and that of
altering, improving, and simplifying those already contrived and
reduced to drawings. Your Committee are so far from being surprised at
the time it has occupied to bring it to its present state, that they
feel more disposed to wonder it has been possible to accomplish so
much.” The true explanation both of the slow progress and of the cost
of the work is clearly stated in this passage; and I may remark in
passing, that the tools which were invented for the construction of the
machine were afterwards found of utility, and that this anticipation of
the Committee has been realized, as some of our most eminent mechanical
engineers will readily testify.

Similar circumstances will, I apprehend, always attend and prolong the
period of bringing to perfection inventions which have no parallel in
the previous history of mechanical {103} construction. The necessary
science and skill specially acquired in executing such works must also,
as experience is gained, suggest deviations from, and improvements in,
the original plan of those works; and the adoption or rejection of such
changes, especially under circumstances similar to those in which I was
placed, often involves questions of the greatest difficulty and anxiety.

From whatever cause, however, the delays and expenses arose, the result
was that the Government was discouraged, and declined to proceed
further with the work.

Mr. Goulburn’s letter, intimating this decision to me, in 1842, will be
found in the accompanying printed Statement. And that the impediments
to the completion of the engine, described by the Royal Society,
were those which influenced the Government in the determination
they came to, I infer from the reason assigned by Mr. Goulburn for
its discontinuance, viz., “the expense which would be necessary in
order to render it either satisfactory to yourself or generally
useful.” I readily admit that the work could not have been rendered
satisfactory to myself unless I was free to introduce every improvement
which experience and thought could suggest. But that even with this
additional source of expense its general usefulness would have been
impaired, I cannot assent to, for I believe, in the words of the Report
I have already quoted, the “immense advantage of accurate Numerical
Tables in all matters of calculation, especially in those which relate
to Astronomy and Navigation, cannot, within any reasonable limits, be
over-estimated.” As to the expense actually incurred upon the first
Difference Engine, that of the Government was about 17,000 _l_. On my
own part, and out of my own private resources, I have sacrificed upon
this and other works of science upwards of 20,000 _l_. {104}

From the date of Mr. Goulburn’s letter, nothing has been done towards
the further completion of the Difference Engine by the Government or
myself. So much of it as was completed was deposited in the Museum of
King’s College, where it now remains.

Three consequences have, however, resulted from my subsequent labours,
to which I attach great importance.

First, I have been led to conceive the most important elements of
another Engine upon a new principle (the details of which are reduced
accurately to paper), the power of which over the most complicated
analytical operations appears nearly unlimited; but no portion of which
is yet commenced. I have called this engine, in contradistinction to
the other, the Analytical Engine.

Secondly, I have invented and brought to maturity a system of signs for
the explanation of machinery, which I have called Mechanical Notation,
by means of which the drawings, the times of action, and the trains for
the transmission of force, are expressed in a language at once simple
and concise. Without the aid of this language I could not have invented
the Analytical Engine; nor do I believe that any machinery of equal
complexity can ever be contrived without the assistance of that or of
some other equivalent language. The Difference Engine No. 2, to which I
shall presently refer, is entirely described by its aid.

Thirdly, in labouring to perfect this Analytical Machine of greater
power and wider range of computation, I have discovered the means of
simplifying and expediting the mechanical processes of the first or
Difference Engine.

After what has passed, I cannot expect the Government to undertake the
construction of the Analytical Engine, and I do not offer it for that
purpose. It is not so matured as to {105} enable any other person,
without long previous training and application, even to attempt its
execution; and on my own part, to superintend its construction would
demand an amount of labour, anxiety, and time which could not, after
the treatment I have received, be expected from me. I therefore make no
such offer.

But that I may fulfil to the utmost of my power the original
expectation that I should be able to complete, for the Government, an
Engine capable of calculating astronomical and nautical Tables with
perfect accuracy, such as that which is described in the Reports of
the Royal Society, I am willing to place at the disposal of Government
(if they will undertake to execute a new Difference Engine) all those
improvements which I have invented and have applied to the Analytical
Engine. These comprise a complete series of drawings and explanatory
notations, finished in 1849, of the Difference Engine No. 2,—an
instrument of greater power as well as of greater simplicity than that
formerly commenced, and now in the possession of the Government.

I have sacrificed time, health, and fortune, in the desire to complete
these Calculating Engines. I have also declined several offers of
great personal advantage to myself. But, notwithstanding the sacrifice
of these advantages for the purpose of maturing an engine of almost
intellectual power, and after expending from my own private fortune a
larger sum than the Government of England has spent on that machine,
the execution of which it only commenced, I have received neither an
acknowledgment of my labours, nor even the offer of those honours or
rewards which are allowed to fall within the reach of men who devote
themselves to purely scientific investigations. I might, perhaps,
advance some claims to consideration, founded on my works and {106}
contributions in aid of various departments of industrial and physical
science,—but it is for others to estimate those services.

I now, however, simply ask your Lordship to do me the honour to
consider this statement and the offer I make. I prefer no claim to
the distinctions or the advantages which it is in the power of the
Crown or the Government to bestow. I desire only to discharge whatever
_imagined_ obligation may be supposed to rest upon me, in connexion
with the original undertaking of the Difference Engine; though I cannot
but feel that whilst the public has already derived advantage from my
labours, I have myself experienced only loss and neglect.

If the work upon which I have bestowed so much time and thought were a
mere triumph over mechanical difficulties, or simply curious, or if the
execution of such engines were of doubtful practicability or utility,
some justification might be found for the course which has been taken;
but I venture to assert that no mathematician who has a reputation
to lose will ever _publicly_ express an opinion that such a machine
would be useless if made, and that no man distinguished as a Civil
Engineer will venture to declare the construction of such machinery
impracticable. The names appended to the Report of the Committee of
the Royal Society fully justify my expressing this opinion, which I
apprehend will not be disputed.

And at a period when the progress of physical science is obstructed
by that exhausting intellectual and manual labour, indispensable for
its advancement, which it is the object of the Analytical Engine to
relieve, I think the application of machinery in aid of the most
complicated and abstruse calculations can no longer be deemed unworthy
of the attention of the country. In fact, there is no reason why mental
as {107} well as bodily labour should not be economized by the aid of
machinery.

With these views I have addressed your Lordship, as the head of the
Government; and whatever may be my sense of the injustice that has
hitherto been done me, I feel, in laying this representation before
your Lordship, and in making the offer I now make, that I have
discharged to the utmost limit every implied obligation I originally
contracted with the country.

 I have the honour to be,
      &c., &c., &c.,
           CHARLES BABBAGE.

 _Dorset Street, Manchester Square._
 _June 8, 1852._

As this question was one of finance and of calculation, the sagacious
Premier adroitly turned it over to his Chancellor of the Exchequer—that
official being, from his office, _supposed_ to be well versed in both
subjects.

The opinion pronounced by the novelist and financier was, “That Mr.
Babbage’s projects appear to be so indefinitely expensive, the ultimate
success so problematical, and the expenditure certainly so large and so
utterly incapable of being calculated, that the Government would not be
justified in taking upon itself any further liability.”—_Extract from
the Reply of Earl Derby to the application of the Earl of Rosse, K.P.,
President of the Royal Society._

〈REFERRED TO THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER.〉

The answer of Lord Derby to Lord Rosse was in substance—

That he had consulted the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who pronounced
Mr. Babbage’s project as— {108}

 1. “Indefinitely expensive.”

 2. “The ultimate success problematical.”

 3. “The expenditure utterly incapable of being calculated.”

1. With regard to the “indefinite expense.” Lord Rosse had proposed
to refer this question to the President of the Institution of Civil
Engineers, who would have given his opinion after a careful examination
of the drawings and notations. These had not been seen by the
Chancellor of the Exchequer; and, if seen by him, would not have been
comprehended.

The objection that its success was “problematical” may refer either to
its mechanical construction or to its mathematical principles.

Who, possessing one grain of common sense, could look upon the
unrivalled workmanship of the then existing portion of the Difference
Engine No. 1, and doubt whether a simplified form of the same engine
could be executed?

As to any doubt of its mathematical principles, this was excusable
in the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who was himself too practically
acquainted with the fallibility of his own figures, over which the
severe duties of his office had stultified his brilliant imagination.
Far other figures are dear to him—those of speech, in which it cannot
be denied he is indeed pre-eminent.

Any junior clerk in his office might, however, have told him that the
power of computing Tables by differences merely required a knowledge of
simple addition.

As to the impossibility of ascertaining the expenditure, this merges
into the first objection; but a poetical brain must be pardoned when
it repeats or amplifies. I will recall to the ex-Chancellor of the
Exchequer what Lord Rosse really {109} proposed, namely, that the
Government should take the opinion of the President of the Institution
of Civil Engineers upon the question, whether a contract could be made
for constructing the Difference Engine, and if so, for what sum.

But the very plan proposed by Lord Rosse and refused by Lord Derby, for
the construction of the _English_ Difference Engine, was adopted some
few years after by another administration for the _Swedish_ Difference
Engine. Messrs. Donkin, the eminent Engineers, _made an estimate_, and
a _contract was_ in consequence executed to construct for Government a
fac-simile of the _Swedish_ Difference Engine, which is now in use in
the department of the Registrar-General, at Somerset House. There were
far greater mechanical difficulties in the production of that machine
than in the one the drawings of which I had offered to the Government.

From my own experience of the cost of executing such works, I have
no doubt, although it was highly creditable to the skill of the able
firm who constructed it, but that it must have been commercially
unprofitable. Under such circumstances, surely it was harsh on the part
of the Government to refuse Messrs. Donkin permission to exhibit it as
a specimen of English workmanship at the Exhibition of 1862.

〈HIS OPINION WORTHLESS.〉

But the machine upon which everybody could calculate, had little chance
of fair play from the man on whom nobody could calculate.

If the Chancellor of the Exchequer had read my letter to Lord Derby,
he would have found the opinion of the Committee of the Royal Society
expressed in these words:—

“They consider the former [the abstract mathematical principle] as not
only sufficiently clear in itself, but as already admitted and acted on
by the Council in their former proceedings. {110}

“The latter [its public utility] they consider as obvious to every one
who considers the immense advantage of accurate numerical tables in all
matters of calculation, especially in those which relate to astronomy
and navigation.”—_Report of the Royal Society, 12th Feb., 1829._

Thus it appears:—

 1st. That the Chancellor of the Exchequer presumed to set up his _own
 idea_ of the utility of the Difference Engine in direct opposition to
 that of the Royal Society.

 2nd. That he _refused_ to take the opinion of the highest mechanical
 authority in the country on its probable cost, and even _to be
 informed_ whether a contract for its construction at a definite sum
 might not be attainable: he then boldly pronounced the expense to be
 “utterly incapable of being calculated.”

〈DIFFERENCE ENGINE No. 2. FEELS FOR THE CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER.〉

This much-abused Difference Engine is, however, like its prouder
relative the Analytical, a being of sensibility, of impulse, and of
power.

It can not only calculate the millions the ex-Chancellor of the
Exchequer squandered, but it can deal with the smallest quantities;
nay, it feels even for zeros.[23] It is as conscious as Lord Derby
himself is of the presence of a _negative quantity_, and it is
not beyond the ken of either of them to foresee the existence of
_impossible ones_.[24]

     [23] It discovers the roots of equations by feeling whether all
     the figures in a certain column are _zeros_.

     [24] It may be necessary to explain to the unmathematical reader
     and to the ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer that _impossible
     quantities_ in algebra are something like _mare’s-nests_ in
     ordinary life.

Yet should any unexpected course of events ever raise the {111}
ex-Chancellor of the Exchequer to his former dignity, I am sure he
will be its _friend_ as soon as he is convinced that it can be made
_useful_ to him.

It may possibly enable him to un-muddle even his own financial
accounts, and to———

But as I have no wish to crucify him, I will leave his name in
obscurity.

The Herostratus of Science, if he escape oblivion, will be linked with
the destroyer of the Ephesian Temple.

{112}




CHAPTER VIII.

OF THE ANALYTICAL ENGINE.


 Man wrongs, and Time avenges.
 BYRON.—_The Prophecy of Dante._

 Built Workshops for constructing the Analytical Engine — Difficulties
 about carrying the Tens — Unexpectedly solved — Application of the
 Jacquard Principle — Treatment of Tables — Probable Time required for
 Arithmetical Operations — Conditions it must fulfil — Unlimited in
 Number of Figures, or in extent of Analytical Operations — The Author
 invited to Turin in 1840 — Meetings for Discussion — Plana, Menabrea,
 MacCullagh, Mosotti — Difficulty proposed by the latter — Observations
 on the Errata of Astronomical Tables — Suggestions for a Reform of
 Analytical Signs.

The circular arrangement of the axes of the Difference Engine round
large central wheels led to the most extended prospects. The whole of
arithmetic now appeared within the grasp of mechanism. A vague glimpse
even of an Analytical Engine at length opened out, and I pursued with
enthusiasm the shadowy vision. The drawings and the experiments were
of the most costly kind. Draftsmen of the highest order were necessary
to economize the labour of my own head; whilst skilled workmen were
required to execute the experimental machinery to which I was obliged
constantly to have recourse.

In order to carry out my pursuits successfully, I had purchased a
house with above a quarter of an acre of ground in a {113} very
quiet locality. My coach-house was now converted into a forge and a
foundry, whilst my stables were transformed into a workshop. I built
other extensive workshops myself, and had a fire-proof building for my
drawings and draftsmen. Having myself worked with a variety of tools,
and having studied the art of constructing each of them, I at length
laid it down as a principle—that, except in rare cases, I would never
do anything myself if I could afford to hire another person who could
do it for me.

〈THE MECHANICAL NOTATION.〉

The complicated relations which then arose amongst the various parts of
the machinery would have baffled the most tenacious memory. I overcame
that difficulty by improving and extending a language of signs, the
Mechanical Notation, which in 1826 I had explained in a paper printed
in the “Phil. Trans.” By such means I succeeded in mastering trains of
investigation so vast in extent that no length of years ever allotted
to one individual could otherwise have enabled me to control. By the
aid of the Mechanical Notation, the Analytical Engine became a reality:
for it became susceptible of demonstration.

Such works could not be carried on without great expenditure.
The fluctuations in the demand and supply of skilled labour were
considerable. The railroad mania withdrew from other pursuits the most
intellectual and skilful draftsmen. One who had for some years been
my chief assistant was tempted by an offer so advantageous that in
justice to his own family he could scarcely have declined it. Under
these circumstances I took into consideration the plan of advancing
his salary to one guinea per day. Whilst this was in abeyance, I
consulted my venerable surviving parent. When I had fully explained the
circumstances, my excellent mother replied: “My dear son, you have
advanced {114} far in the accomplishment of a great object, which is
worthy of your ambition. You are capable of completing it. My advice
is—pursue it, even if it should oblige you to live on bread and cheese.”

This advice entirely accorded with my own feelings. I therefore
retained my chief assistant at his advanced salary.

〈CARRYING THE TENS BY ANTICIPATION.〉

The most important part of the Analytical Engine was undoubtedly
the mechanical method of carrying the tens. On this I laboured
incessantly, each succeeding improvement advancing me a step or two.
The difficulty did not consist so much in the more or less complexity
of the contrivance as in the reduction of the _time_ required to effect
the carriage. Twenty or thirty different plans and modifications had
been drawn. At last I came to the conclusion that I had exhausted the
principle of successive carriage. I concluded also that nothing but
teaching the Engine to foresee and then to act upon that foresight
could ever lead me to the object I desired, namely, to make the whole
of any unlimited number of carriages in one unit of time. One morning,
after I had spent many hours in the drawing-office in endeavouring to
improve the system of successive carriages, I mentioned these views
to my chief assistant, and added that I should retire to my library,
and endeavour to work out the new principle. He gently expressed a
doubt whether the plan was _possible_, to which I replied that, not
being able to prove its impossibility, I should follow out a slight
glimmering of light which I thought I perceived.

After about three hours’ examination, I returned to the drawing-office
with much more definite ideas upon the subject. I had discovered a
principle that proved the possibility, and I had contrived mechanism
which, I thought, would accomplish my object. {115}

I now commenced the explanation of my views, which I soon found were
but little understood by my assistant; nor was this surprising, since
in the course of my own attempt at explanation, I found several defects
in my plan, and was also led by his questions to perceive others. All
these I removed one after another, and ultimately terminated at a late
hour my morning’s work with the conviction that _anticipating_ carriage
was not only within my power, but that I had devised one mechanism at
least by which it might be accomplished.

Many years after, my assistant, on his return from a long residence
abroad, called upon me, and we talked over the progress of the
Analytical Engine. I referred back to the day on which I had made that
most important step, and asked him if he recollected it. His reply was
that he perfectly remembered the circumstance; for that on retiring to
my library, he seriously thought that my intellect was beginning to
become deranged. The reader may perhaps be curious to know how I spent
the rest of that remarkable day.

After working, as I constantly did, for ten or eleven hours a day,
I had arrived at this satisfactory conclusion, and was revising the
rough sketches of the new contrivance, when my servant entered the
drawing-office, and announced that it was seven o’clock—that I dined in
Park Lane—and that it was time to dress. I usually arrived at the house
of my friend about a quarter of an hour before the appointed time, in
order that we might have a short conversation on subjects on which
we were both much interested. Having mentioned my recent success, in
which my host thoroughly sympathized, I remarked that it had produced
an exhilaration of the spirits which not even his excellent champagne
could rival. Having enjoyed the society of Hallam, of Rogers, and of
some few {116} others of that delightful circle, I retired, and joined
one or perhaps two much more extensive reunions. Having thus forgotten
science, and enjoyed society for four or five hours, I returned home.
About one o’clock I was asleep in my bed, and thus continued for the
next five hours.

       *       *       *       *       *

This new and rapid system of carrying the tens when two numbers are
added together, reduced the actual time of the addition of any number
of digits, however large, to nine units of time for the addition,
and one unit for the carriage. Thus in ten’s units of time, any two
numbers, however large, might be added together. A few more units of
time, perhaps five or six, were required for making the requisite
previous arrangements.

Having thus advanced as nearly as seemed possible to the minimum of
time requisite for arithmetical operations, I felt renewed power and
increased energy to pursue the far higher object I had in view.

To describe the successive improvements of the Analytical Engine would
require many volumes. I only propose here to indicate a few of its
more important functions, and to give to those whose minds are duly
prepared for it some information which will remove those vague notions
of wonder, and even of its impossibility, with which it is surrounded
in the minds of some of the most enlightened.

〈JACQUARD LOOM.〉

To those who are acquainted with the principles of the Jacquard loom,
and who are also familiar with analytical formulæ, a general idea of
the means by which the Engine executes its operations may be obtained
without much difficulty. In the Exhibition of 1862 there were many
splendid examples of such looms.

It is known as a fact that the Jacquard loom is capable of {117}
weaving any design which the imagination of man may conceive. It
is also the constant practice for skilled artists to be employed by
manufacturers in designing patterns. These patterns are then sent to
a peculiar artist, who, by means of a certain machine, punches holes
in a set of pasteboard cards in such a manner that when those cards
are placed in a Jacquard loom, it will then weave upon its produce the
exact pattern designed by the artist.

〈WEAVING FORMULÆ.〉

Now the manufacturer may use, for the warp and weft of his work,
threads which are all of the same colour; let us suppose them to be
unbleached or white threads. In this case the cloth will be woven all
of one colour; but there will be a damask pattern upon it such as the
artist designed.

But the manufacturer might use the same cards, and put into the warp
threads of any other colour. Every thread might even be of a different
colour, or of a different shade of colour; but in all these cases the
_form_ of the pattern will be precisely the same—the colours only will
differ.

The analogy of the Analytical Engine with this well-known process is
nearly perfect.

The Analytical Engine consists of two parts:—

1st. The store in which all the variables to be operated upon, as well
as all those quantities which have arisen from the result of other
operations, are placed.

2nd. The mill into which the quantities about to be operated upon are
always brought.

Every formula which the Analytical Engine can be required to compute
consists of certain algebraical operations to be performed upon given
letters, and of certain other modifications depending on the numerical
value assigned to those letters.

There are therefore two sets of cards, the first to direct the {118}
nature of the operations to be performed—these are called operation
cards: the other to direct the particular variables on which those
cards are required to operate—these latter are called variable cards.
Now the symbol of each variable or constant, is placed at the top of a
column capable of containing any required number of digits.

Under this arrangement, when any formula is required to be computed,
a set of operation cards must be strung together, which contain the
series of operations in the order in which they occur. Another set
of cards must then be strung together, to call in the variables into
the mill, the order in which they are required to be acted upon. Each
operation card will require three other cards, two to represent the
variables and constants and their numerical values upon which the
previous operation card is to act, and one to indicate the variable on
which the arithmetical result of this operation is to be placed.

But each variable has below it, on the same axis, a certain number of
figure-wheels marked on their edges with the ten digits: upon these
any number the machine is capable of holding can be placed. Whenever
variables are ordered into the mill, these figures will be brought in,
and the operation indicated by the preceding card will be performed
upon them. The result of this operation will then be replaced in the
store.

〈LAW OF DEVELOPMENT.〉

The Analytical Engine is therefore a machine of the most general
nature. Whatever formula it is required to develop, the law of its
development must be communicated to it by two sets of cards. When these
have been placed, the engine is special for that particular formula.
The numerical value of its constants must then be put on the columns
of wheels below them, and on setting the Engine in motion it will
calculate and print the numerical results of that formula. {119}

Every set of cards made for any formula will at any future time
recalculate that formula with whatever constants may be required.

Thus the Analytical Engine will possess a library of its own. Every set
of cards once made will at any future time reproduce the calculations
for which it was first arranged. The numerical value of its constants
may then be inserted.

It is perhaps difficult to apprehend these descriptions without a
familiarity both with analytical forms and mechanical structures. I
will now, therefore, confine myself to the mathematical view of the
Analytical Engine, and illustrate by example some of its supposed
difficulties.

An excellent friend of mine, the late Professor MacCullagh, of
Dublin, was discussing with me, at breakfast, the various powers of
the Analytical Engine. After a long conversation on the subject, he
inquired what the machine could do if, in the midst of algebraic
operations, it was required to perform logarithmic or trigonometric
operations.

〈ITS USE OF TABLES.〉

My answer was, that whenever the Analytical Engine should exist, all
the developments of formula would be directed by this condition—that
the machine should be able to compute their numerical value in the
shortest possible time. I then added that if this answer were not
satisfactory, I had provided means by which, with equal accuracy, it
might compute by logarithmic or other Tables.

〈DISCOVERS A MISTAKE.〉

I explained that the Tables to be used must, of course, be computed and
punched on cards by the machine, in which case they would undoubtedly
be correct. I then added that when the machine wanted a tabular number,
say the logarithm of a given number, that it would ring a bell and
then stop itself. On this, the attendant would look at a certain part
of the machine, and find that it wanted the logarithm of a given
{120} number, say of 2303. The attendant would then go to the drawer
containing the pasteboard cards representing its table of logarithms.
From amongst these he would take the required logarithmic card, and
place it in the machine. Upon this the engine would first ascertain
whether the assistant had or had not given him the correct logarithm
of the number; if so, it would use it and continue its work. But if
the engine found the attendant had given him a wrong logarithm, it
would then ring a louder bell, and stop itself. On the attendant
again examining the engine, he would observe the words, “Wrong
tabular number,” and then discover that he really had given the wrong
logarithm, and of course he would have to replace it by the right one.

Upon this, Professor MacCullagh naturally asked why, if the machine
could tell whether the logarithm was the right one, it should have
asked the attendant at all? I told him that the means employed were so
ridiculously simple that I would not at that moment explain them; but
that if he would come again in the course of a few days, I should be
ready to explain it. Three or four days after, Bessel and Jacobi, who
had just arrived in England, were sitting with me, inquiring about the
Analytical Engine, when fortunately my friend MacCullagh was announced.
The meeting was equally agreeable to us all, and we continued our
conversation. After some time Bessel put to me the very same question
which MacCullagh had previously asked. On this Jacobi remarked that
he, too, was about to make the same inquiry when Bessel had asked the
question. I then explained to them the following very simple means by
which that verification was accomplished.

〈KNOWS WHAT IT WANTS.〉

Besides the sets of cards which direct the nature of the operations to
be performed, and the variables or constants {121} which are to be
operated upon, there is another class of cards called number cards.
These are much less general in their uses than the others, although
they are necessarily of much larger size.

Any number which the Analytical Engine is capable of using or of
producing can, if required, be expressed by a card with certain holes
in it; thus—

 ┌─────────────────────────────────────┐
 │  NUMBER.               TABLE.       │
 ├─────────────────────────────────────┤
 │ 2  3  0  3      3  6  2  2  9  3  9 │
 ├─────────────────────────────────────┤
 │ •  •  ◊  •      •  •  •  •  •  •  • │
 │ •  •  ◊  •      •  •  •  •  •  •  • │
 │ ◊  •  ◊  •      •  •  ◊  ◊  •  •  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  •  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  •  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  •  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 │ ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊      ◊  ◊  ◊  ◊  •  ◊  • │
 └─────────────────────────────────────┘

The above card contains eleven vertical rows for holes, each row having
nine or any less number of holes. In this example the tabular number is
3 6 2 2 9 3 9, whilst its number in the order of the table is 2 3 0 3.
In fact, the former number is the logarithm of the latter.

The Analytical Engine will contain,

 1st. Apparatus for printing on paper, one, or, if required, two copies
 of its results.

 2nd. Means for producing a stereotype mould of the tables or results
 it computes.

 3rd. Mechanism for punching on blank pasteboard cards or metal plates
 the numerical results of any of its computations.

〈STOPS AND RINGS A BELL.〉

Of course the Engine will compute all the Tables which {122} it may
itself be required to use. These cards will therefore be entirely
free from error. Now when the Engine requires a tabular number, it
will stop, ring a bell, and ask for such number. In the case we have
assumed, it asks for the logarithm of 2 3 0 3.

When the attendant has placed a tabular card in the Engine, the first
step taken by it will be to verify the _number_ of the card given it
by subtracting its number from 2 3 0 3, the number whose logarithm it
asked for. If the remainder is zero, then the engine is certain that
the logarithm must be the right one, since it was computed and punched
by itself.

Thus the Analytical Engine first computes and punches on cards its
own tabular numbers. These are brought to it by its attendant when
demanded. But the engine itself takes care that the _right_ card is
brought to it by verifying the _number_ of that card by the number of
the card which it demanded. The Engine will always reject a wrong card
by continually ringing a loud bell and stopping itself until supplied
with the precise intellectual food it demands.

It will be an interesting question, which time only can solve, to know
whether such tables of cards will ever be required for the Engine.
Tables are used for saving the time of continually computing individual
numbers. But the computations to be made by the Engine are so rapid
that it seems most probable that it will make shorter work by computing
directly from proper formulæ than by having recourse even to its own
Tables.

The Analytical Engine I propose will have the power of expressing every
number it uses to fifty places of figures. It will multiply any two
such numbers together, and then, if required, will divide the product
of one hundred figures by number of fifty places of figures. {123}

〈ARITHMETICAL DIFFICULTIES.〉

Supposing the velocity of the moving parts of the Engine to be not
greater than forty feet per minute, I have no doubt that

 Sixty additions or subtractions may be completed and printed in one
 minute.

 One multiplication of two numbers, each of fifty figures, in one
 minute.

 One division of a number having 100 places of figures by another of 50
 in one minute.

In the various sets of drawings of the modifications of the mechanical
structure of the Analytical Engines, already numbering upwards of
thirty, two great principles were embodied to an unlimited extent.

1st. The entire control over _arithmetical_ operations, however large,
and whatever might be the number of their digits.

2nd. The entire control over the _combinations_ of algebraic symbols,
however lengthened those processes may be required. The possibility of
fulfilling these two conditions might reasonably be doubted by the most
accomplished mathematician as well as by the most ingenious mechanician.

The difficulties which naturally occur to those capable of examining
the question, as far as they relate to arithmetic, are these,—

 (_a_). The number of digits in _each constant_ inserted in the Engine
 must be without limit.

 (_b_). The number of constants to be inserted in the Engine must also
 be without limit.

 (_c_). The number of operations necessary for arithmetic is only four,
 but these four may be repeated an _unlimited_ number of times.

 (_d_). These operations may occur in any order, or follow an
 _unlimited_ number of laws. {124}

〈ALGEBRAICAL DIFFICULTIES.〉

The following conditions relate to the algebraic portion of the
Analytical Engine:—

 (_e_). The number of _litteral_ constants must be _unlimited_.

 (_f_). The number of _variables_ must be _without limit_.

 (_g_). The combinations of the algebraic signs must _be unlimited_.

 (_h_). The number of _functions_ to be employed must be _without
 limit_.

This enumeration includes eight conditions, each of which is absolutely
_unlimited_ as to the number of its combinations.

Now it is obvious that no _finite_ machine can include infinity. It is
also certain that no question _necessarily_ involving infinity can ever
be converted into any other in which the idea of infinity under some
shape or other does not enter.

It is impossible to construct machinery occupying unlimited space; but
it is possible to construct finite machinery, and to use it through
unlimited time. It is this substitution of the _infinity of time_ for
the _infinity of space_ which I have made use of, to limit the size of
the engine and yet to retain its unlimited power.

(_a_). I shall now proceed briefly to point out the means by which I
have effected this change.

〈LARGER NUMBERS TREATED.〉

Since every calculating machine must be constructed for the calculation
of a definite number of figures, the first datum must be to fix upon
that number. In order to be somewhat in advance of the greatest
number that may ever be required, I chose fifty places of figures as
the standard for the Analytical Engine. The intention being that in
such a machine two numbers, each of fifty places of figures, might be
multiplied together and the resultant product of one hundred places
might then be divided by another number of fifty {125} places. It
seems to me probable that a long period must elapse before the demands
of science will exceed this limit. To this it may be added that the
addition and subtraction of numbers in an engine constructed for _n_
places of figures would be equally rapid whether _n_ were equal to five
or five thousand digits. With respect to multiplication and division,
the time required is greater:—

Thus if _a_ . 10^{50} + _b_ and _a′_ . 10^{50} + _b′_ are two numbers
each of less than a hundred places of figures, then each can be
expressed upon two columns of fifty figures, and _a_, _b_, _a′_, _b′_
are each less than fifty places of figures: they can therefore be added
and subtracted upon any column holding fifty places of figures.

The product of two such numbers is—

 _a_ _a′_ 10^{100} + (_a_ _b′_ + _a′_ _b_) 10^{50} + _b_ _b′_.

This expression contains four pair of factors, _a_ _a′_, _a_ _b′_,
_a′_ _b_, _b_ _b′_, each factor of which has less than fifty places of
figures. Each multiplication can therefore be executed in the Engine.
The time, however, of multiplying two numbers, each consisting of any
number of digits between fifty and one hundred, will be nearly four
times as long as that of two such numbers of less than fifty places of
figures.

The same reasoning will show that if the numbers of digits of each
factor are between one hundred and one hundred and fifty, then the time
required for the operation will be nearly nine times that of a pair of
factors having only fifty digits.

Thus it appears that whatever may be the number of digits the
Analytical Engine is capable of holding, if it is required to make all
the computations with _k_ times that number of digits, then it can be
executed by the same Engine, but in an amount of time equal to _k_^{2}
times the former. Hence the {126} condition (_a_), or the unlimited
number of digits contained in each constant employed, is fulfilled.

It must, however, be admitted that this advantage is gained at the
expense of diminishing the number of the constants the Engine can hold.
An engine of fifty digits, when used as one of a hundred digits, can
only contain half the number of variables. An engine containing _m_
columns, each holding _n_ digits, if used for computations requiring
_k_ _n_ digits, can only hold _m_ / _k_ constants or variables.

〈OF PUNCHING CARDS.〉

(_b_). The next step is therefore to prove (_b_), viz.: to show that
a finite engine can be used as if it contained an unlimited number
of constants. The method of punching cards for tabular numbers has
already been alluded to. Each Analytical Engine will contain one or
more apparatus for printing any numbers put into it, and also an
apparatus for punching on pasteboard cards the holes corresponding to
those numbers. At another part of the machine a series of number cards,
resembling those of Jacquard, but delivered to and computed by the
machine itself, can be placed. These can be called for by the Engine
itself in any order in which they may be placed, or according to _any
law_ the Engine may be directed to use. Hence the condition (_b_) is
fulfilled, namely: an _unlimited number of constants_ can be inserted
in the machine in an _unlimited_ time.

I propose in the Engine I am constructing to have places for only a
thousand constants, because I think it will be more than sufficient.
But if it were required to have ten, or even a hundred times that
number, it would be quite possible to make it, such is the simplicity
of its structure of that portion of the Engine.

〈A THOUSAND VARIABLES.〉

(_c_). The next stage in the arithmetic is the number of times {127}
the four processes of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division can be repeated. It is obvious that four different cards thus
punched

     +          −          ×          ÷
 ┌───────┐  ┌───────┐  ┌───────┐  ┌───────┐
 │◊ ◊ ◊  │  │◊ ◊   ◊│  │◊   ◊ ◊│  │  ◊ ◊ ◊│
 └───────┘  └───────┘  └───────┘  └───────┘

would give the orders for the four rules of arithmetic.

Now there is no limit to the number of such cards which may be
strung together according to the nature of the operations required.
Consequently the condition (_c_) is fulfilled.

(_d_). The fourth arithmetical condition (_d_), that the order
of succession in which these operations can be varied, is itself
_unlimited_, follows as a matter of course.

The four remaining conditions which must be fulfilled, in order to
render the Analytical Engine as general as the science of which it is
the powerful executive, relate to algebraic quantities with which it
operates.

The thousand columns, each capable of holding any number of less
than fifty-one places of figures, may each represent a constant or a
variable quantity. These quantities I have called by the comprehensive
title of variables, and have denoted them by V_{_n_}, with an index
below. In the machine I have designed, _n_ may vary from 0 to 999.
But after any one or more columns have been used for variables, if
those variables are not required afterwards, they may be printed upon
paper, and the columns themselves again used for other variables. In
such cases the variables must have a new index; thus, ^{_m_}V^{_n_}. I
propose to make _n_ vary from 0 to 99. If more variables are required,
these may be supplied by Variable Cards, which may follow each other
in unlimited succession. Each card will cause its symbol to be printed
with its proper indices. {128}

For the sake of uniformity, I have used V with as many indices as may
be required throughout the Engine. This, however, does not prevent the
printed result of a development from being represented by any letters
which may be thought to be more convenient. In that part in which the
results are printed, type of any form may be used, according to the
taste of the proposer of the question.

It thus appears that the two conditions, (_e_) and (_f_), which require
that the number of constants and of variables should be unlimited, are
both fulfilled.

The condition (_g_) requiring that the number of combinations of the
four algebraic signs shall be unlimited, is easily fulfilled by placing
them on cards in any order of succession the problem may require.

The last condition (_h_), namely, that the number of functions to
be employed must be without limit, might seem at first sight to be
difficult to fulfil. But when it is considered that any function of any
number of operations performed upon any variables is but a combination
of the four simple signs of operation with various quantities, it
becomes apparent that any function whatever may be represented by
two groups of cards, the first being signs of operation, placed in
the order in which they succeed each other, and the second group of
cards representing the variables and constants placed in the order of
succession in which they are acted upon by the former.

〈A FINITE MACHINE MAY MAKE UNLIMITED CALCULATION.〉

Thus it appears that the whole of the conditions which enable a
_finite_ machine to make calculations of _unlimited_ extent are
fulfilled in the Analytical Engine. The means I have adopted are
uniform. I have converted the infinity of space, which was required
by the conditions of the problem, into the infinity of time. The
means I have employed are in {129} daily use in the art of weaving
patterns. It is accomplished by systems of cards punched with various
holes strung together to any extent which may be demanded. Two large
boxes, the one empty and the other filled with perforated cards, are
placed before and behind a polygonal prism, which revolves at intervals
upon its axis, and advances through a short space, after which it
immediately returns.

A card passes over the prism just before each stroke of the shuttle;
the cards that have passed hang down until they reach the empty box
placed to receive them, into which they arrange themselves one over the
other. When the box is full, another empty box is placed to receive the
coming cards, and a new full box on the opposite side replaces the one
just emptied. As the suspended cards on the entering side are exactly
equal to those on the side at which the others are delivered, they
are perfectly balanced, so that whether the formulæ to be computed be
excessively complicated or very simple, the force to be exerted always
remains nearly the same.

〈DISCUSSIONS AT TURIN.〉

In 1840 I received from my friend M. Plana a letter pressing me
strongly to visit Turin at the then approaching meeting of Italian
philosophers. In that letter M. Plana stated that he had inquired
anxiously of many of my countrymen about the power and mechanism of the
Analytical Engine. He remarked that from all the information he could
collect the case seemed to stand thus:—

“Hitherto the _legislative_ department of our analysis has been all
powerful—the _executive_ all feeble.

“Your engine seems to give us the same control over the executive which
we have hitherto only possessed over the legislative department.”

Considering the exceedingly limited information which {130} could
have reached my friend respecting the Analytical Engine, I was equally
surprised and delighted at his exact prevision of its powers. Even
at the present moment I could not express more clearly, and in fewer
terms, its real object. I collected together such of my models,
drawings, and notations as I conceived to be best adapted to give an
insight into the principles and mode of operating of the Analytical
Engine. On mentioning my intention to my excellent friend the late
Professor MacCullagh, he resolved to give up a trip to the Tyrol, and
join me at Turin.

We met at Turin at the appointed time, and as soon as the first bustle
of the meeting had a little abated, I had the great pleasure of
receiving at my own apartments, for several mornings, Messrs. Plana,
Menabrea, Mossotti, MacCullagh, Plantamour, and others of the most
eminent geometers and engineers of Italy.

Around the room were hung the formula, the drawings, notations, and
other illustrations which I had brought with me. I began on the first
day to give a short outline of the idea. My friends asked from time to
time further explanations of parts I had not made sufficiently clear.
M. Plana had at first proposed to make notes, in order to write an
outline of the principles of the engine. But his own laborious pursuits
induced him to give up this plan, and to transfer the task to a younger
friend of his, M. Menabrea, who had already established his reputation
as a profound analyst.

These discussions were of great value to me in several ways. I was
thus obliged to put into language the various views I had taken, and
I observed the effect of my explanations on different minds. My own
ideas became clearer, and I profited by many of the remarks made by my
highly-gifted friends. {131}

〈MOSOTTI’S DIFFICULTY.〉

One day Mosotti, who had been unavoidably absent from the previous
meeting, when a question of great importance had been discussed, again
joined the party. Well aware of the acuteness and rapidity of my
friend’s intellect, I asked my other friends to allow me five minutes
to convey to Professor Mosotti the substance of the preceding sitting.
After putting a few questions to Mosotti himself, he placed before me
distinctly his greatest difficulty.

He remarked that he was now quite ready to admit the power of mechanism
over numerical, and even over algebraical relations, to any extent. But
he added that he had no conception how the machine could perform the
act of judgment sometimes required during an analytical inquiry, when
two or more different courses presented themselves, especially as the
proper course to be adopted could not be known in many cases until all
the previous portion had been gone through.

〈SOLUTION OF EQUATIONS.〉

I then inquired whether the solution of a numerical equation of any
degree by the usual, but very tedious proceeding of approximation would
be a type of the difficulty to be explained. He at once admitted that
it would be a very eminent one.

For the sake of perspicuity and brevity I shall confine my present
explanation to possible roots.

I then mentioned the successive stages:—

 Number of Operation Cards used.

 1 _a._ Ascertain the number of possible roots by applying Sturm’s
 theorem to the coefficients.

 2 _b._ Find a number greater than the greatest root.

 3 _c._ Substitute the powers of ten (commencing with that next greater
 than the greatest root, and {132}  diminishing the powers by unity at
 each step) for the value of _x_ in the given equation.

 Continue this until the sign of the resulting number changes from
 positive to negative.

 The index of the last power of ten (call it _n_), which is positive,
 expresses the number of digits in that part of the root which consists
 of whole numbers. Call this index _n_ + 1.

 4 _d._ Substitute successively for _x_ in the original equation
 0 × 10^{n}, 1 × 10^{n}, 2 × 10^{n}, 3 × 10^{n}, . . . . 9 × 10^{n},
 until a change of sign occurs in the result. The digit previously
 substituted will be the first figure of the root sought.

 5 _e._ Transform the original equation into another whose roots are
 less by the number thus found.

 The transformed equation will have a real root, the digit, less than
 10^{n}.

 6 _f._ Substitute 1 × 10^{n−1}, 2 × 10^{n−1}, 3 × 10^{n−1}, &c.,
 successively for the root of this equation, until a change of sign
 occurs in the result, as in process 4.

 This will give the second figure of the root.

 This process of alternately finding a new figure in the root, and then
 transforming the equation into another (as in process 4 and 5), must
 be carried on until as many figures as are required, whether whole
 numbers or decimals, are arrived at.

 7 _g._ The root thus found must now be used to reduce the original
 equation to one dimension lower. {133}

 8 _h._ This new equation of one dimension lower must now be treated by
 sections 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7, until the new root is found.

 9 _i._ The repetition of sections 7 and 8 must go on until all the
 roots have been found.

Now it will be observed that Professor Mosotti was quite ready to admit
at once that each of these different processes could be performed by
the Analytical Machine through the medium of properly-arranged sets of
Jacquard cards.

His real difficulty consisted in teaching the engine to know when to
change from one set of cards to another, and back again repeatedly, at
intervals not known to the person who gave the orders.

The dimensions of the algebraic equation being known, the number of
arithmetical processes necessary for Sturm’s theorem is consequently
known. A set of operation cards can therefore be prepared. These must
be accompanied by a corresponding set of variable cards, which will
represent the columns in the store, on which the several coefficients
of the given equation, and the various combinations required amongst
them, are to be placed.

The next stage is to find a number greater than the greatest root of
the given equation. There are various courses for arriving at such a
number. Any one of these being selected, another set of operation and
variable cards can be prepared to execute this operation.

Now, as this second process invariably follows the first, the second
set of cards may be attached to the first set, and the engine will pass
on from the first to the second process, and again from the second to
the third process. {134}

But here a difficulty arises: successive powers of ten are to be
substituted for _x_ in the equation, until a certain event happens. A
set of cards may be provided to make the substitution of the highest
power of ten, and similarly for the others; but on the occurrence of a
certain event, namely, the change of a sign from + to −, this stage of
the calculation is to terminate.

Now at a very early period of the inquiry I had found it necessary to
teach the engine to know when any numbers it might be computing passed
through zero or infinity.

The passage through zero can be easily ascertained, thus: Let the
continually-decreasing number which is being computed be placed upon a
column of wheels in connection with a carrying apparatus. After each
process this number will be diminished, until at last a number is
subtracted from it which is greater than the number expressed on those
wheels.

 Thus let it be   00000,00000,00000,00423
 Subtract         00000,00000,00000,00511
                  ───────────────────────
                  99999,99999,99999,99912

Now in every case of a carriage becoming due, a certain lever is
transferred from one position to another in the cage next above it.

Consequently in the highest cage of all (say the fiftieth in the
Analytical Engine), an arm will be moved or not moved accordingly as
the carriages do or do not run up beyond the highest wheel.

This arm can, of course, make any change which has previously been
decided upon. In the instance we have been considering it would order
the cards to be turned on to the next set.

If we wish to find when any number, which is increasing, {135} exceeds
in the number of its digits the number of wheels on the columns of the
machine, the same carrying arm can be employed. Hence any directions
may be given which the circumstances require.

It will be remarked that this does not actually prove, even in the
Analytical Engine of fifty figures, that the number computed has passed
through infinity; but only that it has become greater than any number
of fifty places of figures.

There are, however, methods by which any machine made for a given
number of figures may be made to compute the same formulæ with double
or any multiple of its original number. But the nature of this work
prevents me from explaining that method.

It may here be remarked that in the process, the cards employed to
make the substitutions of the powers of ten are operation cards. They
are, therefore, quite independent of the numerical values substituted.
Hence the same set of _operation_ cards which order the substitutions
1 × 10^{n} will, if backed, order the substitution of 2 × 10^n, &c. We
may, therefore, avail ourselves of mechanism for backing these cards,
and call it into action whenever the circumstances themselves require
it.

The explanation of M. Mosotti’s difficulty is this:—Mechanical means
have been provided for backing or advancing the operation cards to any
extent. There exist means of expressing the conditions under which
these various processes are required to be called into play. It is not
even necessary that two courses only should be possible. Any number of
courses may be possible at the same time; and the choice of each may
depend upon any number of conditions.

〈GENERAL MENABREA’S DESCRIPTION.〉

It was during these meetings that my highly valued friend, M. Menabrea,
collected the materials for that lucid and {136} admirable description
which he subsequently published in the Bibli. Univ. de Genève, t. xli.
Oct. 1842.

The elementary principles on which the Analytical Engine rests were
thus in the first instance brought before the public by General
Menabrea.

〈THE COUNTESS OF LOVELACE’S NOTES.〉

Some time after the appearance of his memoir on the subject in the
“Bibliothèque Universelle de Genève,” the late Countess of Lovelace[25]
informed me that she had translated the memoir of Menabrea. I asked why
she had not herself written an original paper on a subject with which
she was so intimately acquainted? To this Lady Lovelace replied that
the thought had not occurred to her. I then suggested that she should
add some notes to Menabrea’s memoir; an idea which was immediately
adopted.

     [25] Ada Augusta, Countess of Lovelace, only child of the Poet
     Byron.

We discussed together the various illustrations that might be
introduced: I suggested several, but the selection was entirely her
own. So also was the algebraic working out of the different problems,
except, indeed, that relating to the numbers of Bernouilli, which I had
offered to do to save Lady Lovelace the trouble. This she sent back to
me for an amendment, having detected a grave mistake which I had made
in the process.

The notes of the Countess of Lovelace extend to about three times the
length of the original memoir. Their author has entered fully into
almost all the very difficult and abstract questions connected with the
subject.

These two memoirs taken together furnish, to those who are capable of
understanding the reasoning, a complete demonstration—_That the whole
of the developments and operations of analysis are now capable of being
executed by machinery_.

〈VARIOUS APPLICATIONS.〉

There are various methods by which these developments {137} are
arrived at:—1. By the aid of the Differential and Integral Calculus.
2. By the Combinatorial Analysis of Hindenburg. 3. By the Calculus of
Derivations of Arbogast.

Each of these systems professes to expand any function according to
any laws. Theoretically each method may be admitted to be perfect; but
practically the time and attention required are, in the greater number
of cases, more than the human mind is able to bestow. Consequently,
upon several highly interesting questions relative to the Lunar theory,
some of the ablest and most indefatigable of existing analysts are at
variance.

The Analytical Engine is capable of executing the laws prescribed by
each of these methods. At one period I examined the Combinatorial
Analysis, and also took some pains to ascertain from several of my
German friends, who had had far more experience of it than myself,
whether it could be used with greater facility than the Differential
system. They seemed to think that it was more readily applicable to all
the usual wants of analysis.

I have myself worked with the system of Arbogast, and if I were to
decide from my own limited use of the three methods, I should, for the
purposes of the Analytical Engine, prefer the Calcul des Derivations.

As soon as an Analytical Engine exists, it will necessarily guide the
future course of the science. Whenever any result is sought by its aid,
the question will then arise—By what course of calculation can these
results be arrived at by the machine in the _shortest time_?

In the drawings I have prepared I proposed to have a thousand
variables, upon each of which any number not having more than fifty
figures can be placed. This machine would multiply 50 figures by other
50, and print the product {138} of 100 figures. Or it would divide
any number having 100 figures by any other of 50 figures, and print
the quotient of 50 figures. Allowing but a moderate velocity for the
machine, the time occupied by either of these operations would be about
one minute.

The whole of the _numerical_ constants throughout the works of Laplace,
Plana, Le Verrier, Hansen, and other eminent men whose indefatigable
labours have brought astronomy to its present advanced state, might
easily be recomputed. They are but the numerical coefficients of the
various terms of functions developed according to certain series. In
all cases in which these numerical constants can be calculated by more
than one method, it might be desirable to compute them by several
processes until frequent practice shall have confirmed our belief in
the infallibility of mechanism.

〈ERRORS OF TABLES.〉

The great importance of having accurate Tables is admitted by all who
understand their uses; but the multitude of errors really occurring is
comparatively little known. Dr. Lardner, in the “Edinburgh Review,” has
made some very instructive remarks on this subject.

I shall mention two within my own experience: these are selected
because they occurred in works where neither care nor expense were
spared on the part of the Government to insure perfect accuracy. It is,
however, but just to the eminent men who presided over the preparation
of these works for the press to observe, that the real fault lay not in
them but in _the nature of things_.

In 1828 I lent the Government an original MS. of the table of
Logarithmic Sines, Cosines, &c., computed to every second of the
quadrant, in order that they might have it compared with Taylor’s
Logarithms, 4to., 1792, of which they possessed a considerable number
of copies. Nineteen {139} errors were thus detected, and a list of
these errata was published in the Nautical Almanac for 1832: these may
be called

 Nineteen errata of the first order . . 1832.

An error being detected in one of these errata, in the following
Nautical Almanac we find an

 Erratum of the errata in N. Alm. 1832 . . 1833.

But in this very erratum of the second order a new mistake was
introduced larger than any of the original mistakes. In the year next
following there ought to have been found

 Erratum in the erratum of the errata in N. Alm. 1832 . . 1834.

In the “Tables de la Lune,” by M. P. A. Hansen, 4to, 1857, published
at the expense of the English Government, under the direction of
the Astronomer Royal, is to be found a list of errata amounting to
155. In the 21st of these original errata there have been found
_three_ mistakes. These are duly noted in a newly-printed list of
errata discovered during computations made with them in the “Nautical
Almanac;” so that we now have the errata of an erratum of the original
work.

This list of errata from the office of the “Nautical Almanac” is larger
than the original list. The total number of errors at present (1862)
discovered in Hansen’s “Tables of the Moon” amounts to above three
hundred and fifty. In making these remarks I have no intention of
imputing the slightest blame to the Astronomer Royal, who, like other
men, cannot avoid submitting to inevitable fate. The only circumstance
which is really extraordinary is that, when it was demonstrated that
all tables are capable of being computed by machinery, and even when
a machine existed which {140} computed certain tables, that the
Astronomer Royal did not become the most enthusiastic supporter of
an instrument which could render such invaluable service to his own
science.

In the Supplementary Notices of the Astronomical Society, No. 9, vol.
xxiii., p. 259, 1863, there occurs a Paper by M. G. de Ponteculant,
in which forty-nine numerical coefficients relative to the Longitude,
Latitude, and Radius vector of the Moon are given as computed by Plana,
Delaunay, and Ponteculant. The computations of Plana and Ponteculant
agree in thirteen cases; those of Delaunay and Ponteculant in two; and
in the remaining thirty-four cases they all three differ.

〈REMARKS ON ANALYSIS.〉

I am unwilling to terminate this chapter without reference to another
difficulty now arising, which is calculated to impede the progress of
Analytical Science. The extension of analysis is so rapid, its domain
so unlimited, and so many inquirers are entering into its fields, that
a variety of new symbols have been introduced, formed on no common
principles. Many of these are merely new ways of expressing well-known
functions. Unless some philosophical principles are generally admitted
as the basis of all notation, there appears a great probability of
introducing the confusion of Babel into the most accurate of all
languages.

A few months ago I turned back to a paper in the Philosophical
Transactions, 1844, to examine some analytical investigations of great
interest by an author who has thought deeply on the subject. It related
to the separation of symbols of operation from those of quantity, a
question peculiarly interesting to me, since the Analytical Engine
contains the embodiment of that method. There was no ready, sufficient,
and simple mode of distinguishing letters which represented quantity
from those which indicated operation. To {141} understand the results
the author had arrived at, it became necessary to read the whole Memoir.

Although deeply interested in the subject, I was obliged, with great
regret, to give up the attempt; for it not only occupied much time, but
placed too great a strain on the memory.

Whenever I am thus perplexed it has often occurred to me that the very
simple plan I have adopted in my _Mechanical Notation_ for lettering
drawings might be adopted in analysis.

On the geometrical drawings of machinery every piece of matter which
represents framework is invariably denoted by an _upright_ letter;
whilst all letters indicating moveable parts are marked by _inclined_
letters.

The analogous rule would be—

Let all letters indicating operations or modifications be expressed by
_upright_ letters;

Whilst all letters representing quantity should be represented by
_inclined_ letters.

The subject of the principles and laws of notation is so important
that it is desireable, before it is too late, that the scientific
academies of the world should each contribute the results of their own
examination and conclusions, and that some congress should assemble to
discuss them. Perhaps it might be still better if each academy would
draw up its own views, illustrated by examples, and have a sufficient
number printed to send to all other academies.

{142}




CHAPTER IX.

OF THE MECHANICAL NOTATION.


 Art of Lettering Drawings — Of expressing the Time and Duration of
 Action of every Part — A New Demonstrative Science — Royal Medals of
 1826.

Soon after I had commenced the Difference Engine, my attention
was strongly directed to the imperfection of all known modes of
explaining and demonstrating the construction of machinery. It soon
became apparent that my progress would be seriously impeded unless
I could devise more rapid means of understanding and recalling the
interpretation of my own drawings.

By a new system of very simple signs I ultimately succeeded in
rendering the most complicated machine capable of explanation almost
without the aid of words.

In order thoroughly to understand the action of any machine, we must
have full information upon the following subjects, and it is of the
greatest importance that this information should be acquired in the
shortest possible time.

I. The actual shape and relative position of every piece of matter of
which the machine is composed.

This can be accomplished by the ordinary mechanical drawings. Such
drawings usually have letters upon them for the sake of reference in
the description of the machine. Hitherto such letters were chosen
without any principle, {143} and in fact gave no indication of
anything except the mere spot upon the paper on which they were written.

〈RULES FOR LETTERING.〉

I then laid down rules for the selection of letters. I shall only
mention one or two of them:—

1. All upright letters, as a, c, d, e, A, B, represent framing.

2. All inclined letters, as _a_, _c_, _d_, _e_, _A_, _B_, represent
moveable parts.

3. All small letters represent working points. One of the most obvious
advantages of these rules is that they enable the attention to be more
easily confined to the immediate object sought.

By other rules it is rendered possible, when looking at a plan of any
complicated machine, to perceive the _relative order_ of super-position
of any number of wheels, arms, &c., without referring to the elevation
or end view.

II. The actual time and duration of every motion throughout the action
of any machine can be ascertained almost instantly by a system of signs
called the Notations of Periods.

It possesses equal facilities for ascertaining every contemporaneous as
well as for every successive system of movements.

III. The actual connection of each moveable piece of the machine with
every other on which it acts. Thus, taking from any special part of the
drawing the indicating letter, and looking for it on a certain diagram,
called the trains, the whole course of its movements may be traced, up
to the prime mover, or down to the final result.

I have called this system of signs the Mechanical Notation. By its
application to geometrical drawing it has given us a new demonstrative
science, namely, that of proving that any given machine can or cannot
exist; and if it can exist, that it will accomplish its desired object.
{144}

It is singular that this addition to human knowledge should have been
made just about the period when it was beginning to be felt by those
most eminently skilled in analysis that the time has arrived when many
of its conclusions rested only on probable evidence. This state of
things arose chiefly from the enormous extent to which the developments
were necessarily carried in the lunar and planetary theories.

〈ASTRONOMICAL MEDAL.〉

After employing this language for several years, it was announced, in
December 1825, that King William IV. had founded two medals of fifty
guineas each, to be given annually by the Royal Society according to
rules to be laid down by the Council.

On the 26th January 1826, it was resolved,

“That it is the opinion of the Council that the medals be awarded for
the most important discoveries or series of investigations, completed
and made known to the Royal Society in the year preceding the day of
the award.”

This rule reduced the number of competitors to a very few. Although I
had had some experience as to the mode in which medals were awarded,
and therefore valued them accordingly, I was simple enough to expect
that the Council of the Royal Society would not venture upon a fraud on
the very first occasion of exercising the royal liberality. I had also
another motive for taking a ticket in this philosophical lottery of
medals.

〈ROYAL SOCIETY MEDAL.〉

In 1824, the Astronomical Society did me the honour to award to me
the first gold medal they ever bestowed. It was rendered still more
grateful by the address of that eminent man, the late Henry Thomas
Colebrooke, the President, who in a spirit of prophecy anticipated the
results of years, at that period, long future. {145}

“It may not, therefore, be deemed too sanguine an anticipation, when I
express the hope that an instrument which in its simpler form attains
to the extraction of the roots of numbers, and approximates to the
roots of equations, may, in a more advanced state of improvement,
rise to the approximate solutions of algebraic equations of elevated
degrees. I refer to solutions of such equations proposed by Lagrange,
and more recently by other analysts, which involve operations too
tedious and intricate for use, and which must remain without efficacy,
unless some mode be devised of abridging the labour or facilitating the
means of performance.”[26]

     [26] ‘Discourse of the President on delivering the first Gold
     Medal of the Astronomical Society to Charles Babbage, Esq.’
     ‘Memoirs of the Astronomical Society,’ vol. i. p. 509.

I felt, therefore, that the _first_ Royal Medal might fairly become an
object of ambition, whatever might be the worth of subsequent ones.

In order to qualify myself for this chance, I carefully drew up a
paper, “On a Method of expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery,”
which I otherwise should not have published at that time.

This Memoir was read at the Royal Society on the 16th March, 1826. To
the system of signs which it first expounded I afterwards gave the name
of “Mechanical Notation.” It had been used in England and in Ireland,
although not taught in its schools. It applies to the description of a
combat by sea or by land. It can assist in representing the functions
of animal life; and I have had both from the Continent and from the
United States, specimens of such applications. Finally, to whatever
degree of simplicity I may at last have reduced the Analytical Engine,
the course {146} through which I arrived at it was the most entangled
and perplexed which probably ever occupied the human mind. Through the
aid of the Mechanical Notation I examined numberless plans and systems
of computing, and I am sure, from the nature of its self-necessary
verifications that it is impossible I can have been deceived.

On the 16th November, 1826, that very Council of the Royal Society
which had made the law took the earliest opportunity to violate it
by awarding the two Royal Medals, the first to Dalton, whose great
discovery had been made nearly twenty years before, and the other
to Ivory, for a paper published in their “Transactions” three years
before. The history of their proceedings will be found in the “Decline
of Science in England,” p. 115, 1830.

{147}




CHAPTER X.

THE EXHIBITION OF 1862.


 “En administration, toutes les sottises sont mères.”—_Maximes_, par M.
 G. De Levis.

 “An abject worship of princes and an unaccountable appetite for
 knighthood are probably unavoidable results of placing second-rate men
 in prominent positions.”—_Saturday Review_, January 16, 1864.

 “Whose fault is this? But tallow, toys, and sweetmeats evidently stand
 high in the estimation of Her Majesty’s Commissioners.”—_The Times_,
 August 13, 1862.

 Mr. Gravatt suggests to King’s College the exhibition of the
 Difference Engine No. 1, and offers to superintend its Transmission
 and Return — Place allotted to it most unfit — Not Exhibited in 1851
 — Its Loan refused to New York — Refused to the Dublin Exhibition
 in 1847 — Not sent to the great French Exhibition in 1855 — Its
 Exhibition in 1862 entirely due to Mr. Gravatt — Space for its
 Drawings refused — The Payment of Six Shillings a Day for a competent
 person to explain it refused by the Commissioners — Copy of Swedish
 Difference Engine made by English Workmen not exhibited — Loan of
 various other Calculating Machines offered — Anecdote of Count
 Strzelecki’s — The Royal Commissioners’ elaborate taste for Children’s
 Toys — A plan for making such Exhibitions profitable — Extravagance of
 the Commissioners to their favourite — Contrast between his Treatment
 and that of Industrious Workmen — The Inventor of the Difference
 Engine publicly insulted by his Countrymen in the Exhibition of 1862.


_Circumstances connected with the Exhibition of the Difference Engine
No. 1 in the International Exhibition of 1862._

When the construction of the Difference Engine No. 1 was abandoned by
the Government in 1842, I was consulted respecting the place in which
it should be deposited. Well aware of the unrivalled perfection of its
workmanship, and {148} conscious that it formed the first great step
towards reducing the whole science of number to the absolute control
of mechanism, I wished it to be placed wherever the greatest number of
persons could see it daily.

〈ENGINE No. 1 IN KING’S COLLEGE.〉

With this view, I advised that it should be placed in one of the
much-frequented rooms of the British Museum. Another locality was,
however, assigned to it, and it was confided by the Government to the
care of King’s College, Somerset House. It remained in safe custody
within its glass case in the Museum of that body for twenty years.
It is remarkable that during that long period no person should have
studied its structure, and, by explaining its nature and use, have
acquired an amount of celebrity which the singularity of that knowledge
would undoubtedly have produced.

The College authorities did justice to their charge. They put it in the
place of honour, in the centre of their Museum, and would, no doubt
have given facilities to any of their members or to other persons who
might have wished to study it.

〈THE GOVERNMENT IGNORE IT.〉

But the system quietly pursued by the Government, of ignoring the
existence of the Difference Engine and its inventor doubtlessly
exercised its deadening influence[27] on those who were inclined, by
taste or acquirements, to take such a course. {149}

     [27] An illustration fell under my notice a few days after this
     paragraph was printed. A _new_ work on Geometrical Drawing,
     commissioned by the Committee of Council on Education, was
     published by Professor Bradley. I have not been able to find in it
     a single word concerning “Mechanical Notation,” not even the very
     simplest portion of that science, namely, the Art of Lettering
     Drawings. It would seem impossible that any _Professor_ of so
     limited a subject could be ignorant of the existence of such an
     important addition to its powers.

I shall enumerate a few instances.

1. In 1850, the Government appointed a Commission to organize the
Exhibition of 1851.

The name of the author of the _Economy of Manufactures_ was not thought
worthy by the Government to be placed on that Commission.

2. In 1851, the Commissioners of the International Exhibition did
not think proper to exhibit the Difference Engine, although it was
the property of the nation. They were as insensible to the greatest
mechanical as to, what has been regarded by some, the greatest
intellectual triumph of their country.

3. When it was decided by the people of the United States to have an
Exhibition at New York, they sent a Commissioner to Europe to make
arrangement for its success. He was authorized to apply for the loan of
the Difference Engine for a few months, and was empowered to give any
pecuniary guarantee which might be required for its safe return.

That Commissioner, on his arrival, applied to me on the subject. I
explained to him the state of the case, and advised him to apply to the
Government, whose property it was. I added that, if his application was
successful, I would at my own expense put the machine in good working
order, and give him every information requisite for its safe conveyance
and use. His application was, however, unsuccessful.

4. In 1847, Mr. Dargan nobly undertook at a vast expense to make an
Exhibition in Dublin to aid in the relief of his starving countrymen.
It was thought that the exhibition of the Difference Engine would be a
great attraction. I was informed at the time that an application was
made to the Government for its loan, and that it was also unsuccessful.
{150}

5. In 1855 the great French Exhibition occurred. Previously to its
opening, our Government sent Commissioners to arrange and superintend
the English department.

These Commissioners reported that the English contribution was
remarkably deficient in what in France are termed “instruments de
précision,” a term which includes a variety of instruments for
scientific purposes. They recommended that “a Committee should be
appointed who could represent to the producers of Philosophical
Instruments how necessary it was that they should, upon an occasion of
this kind, maintain their credit in the eyes of Europe.” The Government
also applied to the Royal Society for advice; but neither did the Royal
Society advise, nor the Government propose, to exhibit the Difference
Engine.

6. The French Exhibition of 1855 was remarkable beyond all former
ones for the number and ingenuity of the machines which performed
arithmetical operations.

Pre-eminently above all others stood the Swedish Machine for
calculating and printing mathematical Tables. It is honourable to
France that its highest reward was deservedly given to the inventor
of that machine; whilst it is somewhat remarkable that the English
Commissioners appointed to report upon the French Exhibition omitted
all notice of these Calculating Machines.

〈MR. GRAVATT SUCCEEDS IN EXHIBITING IT IN 1862.〉

The appearance of the finished portion of the unfinished Difference
Engine No. 1 at the Exhibition of 1862 is entirely due to Mr. Gravatt.
That gentleman had a few years before paid great attention to the
Swedish Calculating Engine of M. Scheutz, and was the main cause of its
success in this country.

Being satisfied that it was possible to calculate and print all Tables
by machinery, Mr. Gravatt became convinced that {151} the time must
arrive when no Tables would ever be calculated or printed except by
machines. He felt that it was of great importance to accelerate the
arrival of that period, more especially as numerical Tables, which are
at present the most expensive kind of printing, would then become the
cheapest.

In furtherance of this idea, Mr. Gravatt wrote to Dr. Jelf, the
Principal of King’s College, Somerset House, to suggest that the
Difference Engine of Mr. Babbage, which had for so many years
occupied a prominent place in the museum, should be exhibited in the
International Exhibition of 1862. He at the same time offered his
assistance in the removal and reinstatement of that instrument.

The authorities of the College readily acceded to this plan. On further
inquiry, it appeared that the Difference Engine belonged to the
Government, and was only deposited with the College. It was then found
necessary to make an application to the Treasury for permission to
exhibit it, which was accordingly done by the proper authorities.

The Government granted the permission, and referred it to the Board of
Works to superintend its placement in the building.

The Board of Works sent to me a copy of the correspondence relative to
this matter, asking my opinion whether any danger might be apprehended
for the safety of the machine during its transport, and also inquiring
whether I had any other suggestion to make upon the subject.

Knowing the great strength of the work, I immediately answered that I
did not anticipate the slightest injury from its transport, and that,
under the superintendence of Mr. Gravatt, I considered it might be
removed with perfect safety. The only suggestion I ventured to offer
was, that as the Government possessed in the department of the {152}
Registrar-General a copy, made by English workmen, of the Swedish
Difference Engine, that it should be exhibited by the side of mine: and
that both the Engines should be kept constantly working with a very
slow motion.

〈SWEDISH ENGINE NOT EXHIBITED.〉

By a subsequent communication I was informed that the Swedish Machine
could not be exhibited, because it was then in constant use, computing
certain Tables relating to the values of lives. I regretted this very
much. I had intended to alter the handle of my own Engine in order to
make it moveable circularly by the same catgut which I had hoped might
have driven both. The Tables which the Swedish Machine was employed
in printing were _not_ of any pressing necessity, and their execution
could, upon such an occasion, have been postponed for a few months
without loss or inconvenience.

Besides, if the Swedish Engine had, as I proposed, been placed at work,
its superintendent might have continued his table-making with but
little delay, and the public would have been highly gratified by the
sight.

He could also have given information to the public by occasional
explanations of its principles; thus might Her Majesty’s Commissioners
have gratified thousands of her subjects who came, with intense
curiosity, prepared to be pleased and instructed, and whom they sent
away amazed and disappointed.

From the experience I had during the first week of the Exhibition, I am
convinced that if a fit place had been provided for the two Calculating
Machines, so that the public might have seen them both in constant but
slow motion, and if the superintendent had occasionally given a short
explanation of the principles on which they acted, they would have been
one of the greatest attractions within the building. {153}

On Mr. Gravatt applying to the Commissioners for space, it was stated
that the Engine must be placed amongst philosophical instruments, Class
XIII.

〈ENGLISH ENGINE POKED INTO A HOLE.〉

The only place offered for its reception was a small hole, 4 feet 4
inches in front by 5 feet deep. On one side of this was the _only_
passage to the office of the superintendent of the class. The opposite
side was occupied by a glass case in which I placed specimens of the
separate parts of the unfinished engine. These, although executed by
English workmen above thirty years ago, were yet, in the opinion of the
most eminent engineers, unsurpassed by any work the building of 1862
contained. The back of this recess was closed in and dark, and only
allowed a space on the wall of about five feet by four, on which to
place the _whole_ of the drawings and illustrations of the Difference
Engine. Close above the top of the machine was a flat roof, which
deprived the drawings and the work itself of much light.

The public at first flocked to it: but it was so placed that only three
persons could conveniently see it at the same time. When Mr. Gravatt
kindly explained and set it in motion, he was continually interrupted
by the necessity of moving away in order to allow access to the
numerous persons whose business called them to the superintendent’s
office. At a very early period various representations were made to the
Commissioners by the Jury, the superintendent, and very strongly by the
press, of the necessity of having some qualified person to explain the
machine to the public. I was continually informed by the attendants
that hundreds of persons had, during my absence asked, when they could
get an opportunity of seeing the machine in motion.

Admiring the earnestness of purpose and the sagacity with which Mr.
Gravatt had steadily followed out the convictions of {154} his own
mind relative to the abolition of all tables except those made and
stereotyped by machinery, I offered all the assistance in my power to
accelerate the accomplishment of his task.

I lent him for exhibition numerous specimens of the unfinished
portions of the Difference Engine No. 1. These I had purchased on the
determination of the Government to abandon its construction in 1842.

I proposed also to lend him the Mechanical Notations of the Difference
Engine, which had been made at my own expense, and were finished by
myself and my eldest son, Mr. B. Herschel Babbage.

I had had several applications from foreigners[28] for some account
of my system of Mechanical Notation, and great desire was frequently
expressed to see the illustrations of the method itself, and of its
various applications.

     [28] One object of the mission of Professor Bolzani was, to take
     back with him to Russia such an account of the Mechanical Notation
     as might facilitate its teaching in the Russian Universities. I
     regret that it was entirely out of my power to assist him.

These, however, were so extensive that it was impossible, without very
great inconvenience, to exhibit them even in my own house.

〈THE LOAN OF OTHER CALCULATING MACHINES OFFERED.〉

I therefore wrote to Mr. Gravatt to offer him the loan of the following
property for the Exhibition:—

 1. A small Calculating Machine of the simplest order for adding
 together any number of separate sums of money, provided the total was
 under 100,000 _l._, by Sir Samuel Morland. 1666.

 2. A very complete and well-executed Machine for answering all
 questions in plane trigonometry, by Sir Samuel Morland. 1663. {155}

 3. An original set of Napier’s bones.

 4. A small Arithmetical Machine, by Viscount Mahon, afterwards Earl
 Stanhope. Without date.

 5. A larger Machine, to add, subtract, multiply, and divide, by
 Viscount Mahon. 1775.

 6. Another similar Machine, of a somewhat different construction, for
 the same operations, by Viscount Mahon. 1777.

 7. A small Difference Engine, made in London, in consequence of its
 author having read Dr. Lardner’s article in the “Edinburgh Review” of
 July, 1834, No. CXX.


_List of Mechanical Notations proposed to be Lent for the Exhibition._

 1. All the drawings explaining the principles of the Mechanical
 Notation.

 2. The complete Mechanical Notations of the Swedish Calculating Engine
 of M. Scheutz.

 These latter drawings had been made and used by my youngest son, Major
 Henry P. Babbage, now resident in India, in explaining the principles
 of the Mechanical Notation at the meeting of the British Association
 at Glasgow, and afterwards in London, at a meeting of the Institution
 of Civil Engineers.[29]

 [29] See Proceedings of British Association at Glasgow, 1855, p. 203;
also Minutes of Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers, vol.
xv., 1856.

 3. The Mechanical Notations of the Difference Engine No. 1. {156}

 These had been made at my own expense, and were finished by myself
 and my eldest son, Mr. B. Herschel Babbage, now resident in South
 Australia.

 4. A complete set of the drawings of the Difference Engine No. 2, for
 calculating and printing tables, with seven orders of differences, and
 thirty places of figures. Finished in 1849.

 5. A complete set of the Notations necessary for the explanation and
 demonstration of Difference Engine No. 2, finished in 1849.

These drawings and notations would have required for their exhibition
about seven or eight hundred square feet of wall. My letter to Mr.
Gravatt was forwarded to the Commissioners with his own application
for space to exhibit them. The Commissioners declined this offer; yet
during the first six weeks of the Exhibition there was at a short
distance from the Difference Engine an empty space of wall large enough
for the greater part of these instructive diagrams. This portion of
wall was afterwards filled up by a vast oil-cloth. Other large portions
of wall, to the amount of thousands of square feet, were given up to
other oil-cloths, and to numberless carpets. It is evident the Royal
Commissioners were much better qualified to judge of furniture for the
feet than of furniture for the head.

I was myself frequently asked why I did not employ a person to explain
the Difference Engine. In reply to some of my friends, I inquired
whether, when they purchased a carriage, they expected the builder to
pay the wages of their coachman.

〈FOREIGN VISITORS PUZZLED.〉

But my greatest difficulty was with foreigners; no explanation I could
devise, and I tried many, appeared at all {157} to satisfy their
minds. The thing seemed to them entirely incomprehensible.

That the nation possessing the greatest military and commercial marine
in the world—the nation which had spent so much in endeavouring to
render perfect the means of finding the longitude—which had recently
caused to be computed and published at considerable expense an entirely
new set of lunar Tables should not have availed itself _at any cost_
of mechanical means of computing and stereotyping such Tables, seemed
entirely beyond their comprehension.

At last they asked me whether the Commissioners were _bêtes_. I
assured them that the only _one_ with whom I was personally acquainted
certainly was not.

When hard pressed by difficult questions, I thought it my duty as an
Englishman to save my country’s character, even at the expense of my
own. So on one occasion I suggested to my unsatisfied friends that
Commissioners were usually selected from the highest class of society,
and that possibly four out of five had never heard of my name.

But here again my generous efforts to save the character of my country
and its Commissioners entirely failed. Several of my foreign friends
had known me in their own homes, and had seen the estimation in which I
was held by their own countrymen and by their own sovereign. These were
still more astonished.

〈CHINESE INQUIRE ABOUT IT.〉

On another occasion an anecdote was quoted against me to prove that my
name was well known even in China. It may, perhaps, amuse the reader.
A short time after the arrival of Count Strzelecki in England, I had
the pleasure of meeting him at the table of a common friend. Many
inquiries were made relative to his residence in China. Much interest
was expressed by several of the party to learn on {158} what subject
the Chinese were most anxious to have information. Count Strzelecki
told them that the subject of most frequent inquiry was Babbage’s
Calculating Machine. On being further asked as to the nature of the
inquiries, he said they were most anxious to know whether it would
go into the pocket. Our host now introduced me to Count Strzelecki,
opposite to whom I was then sitting. After expressing my pleasure at
the introduction, I told the Count that he might safely assure his
friends in the Celestial Empire that it was in every sense of the word
an _out-of-pocket_ machine.

At last the Commissioners were moved, not to supply the deficiency
themselves, but to address the Government, to whom the Difference
Engine belonged, to send somebody to explain it. I received a
communication from the Board of Works, inquiring whether I could make
any suggestions for getting over this difficulty. I immediately made
inquiries, and found a person who formerly had been my amanuensis, and
had, under my direction, worked out many most intricate problems. He
possessed very considerable knowledge of mathematics, and was willing,
for the moderate remuneration of six shillings a day, to be present
daily during nine hours to explain the Difference Engine.

I immediately sent this information to the Board of Works, with the
name and address of the person I recommended. This, I have little
doubt, was directly communicated to the Commissioners; but they did not
avail themselves of his services.

〈COMMISSIONERS INEXPLICABLE.〉

It is difficult, upon any principle, to explain the conduct of the
Royal Commissioners of the Exhibition of 1862. They were appointed by
the Government, yet when the Government itself became an exhibitor,
and sent for exhibition a {159} Difference Engine, the property of
the nation, these Commissioners placed it in a _small hole_ in a _dark
corner_, where it could, with some difficulty, be seen by six people at
the same time.

No remonstrance was of the slightest avail; it was “Hobson’s choice,”
that or none. It was represented that all other space was occupied.

A trophy of children’s toys, whose merits, it is true, the
Commissioners were somewhat more competent to appreciate, filled
one of the most prominent positions in the building. On the other
hand, a trophy of the workmanship of English engineers, executed by
_machine tools_ thirty years before, and admitted by the best judges
to be unsurpassed by any rival, was placed in a position not very
inappropriate for the authorities themselves who condemned it to that
locality.

But no hired aristocratic[30] agent was employed to excite the
slumbering perceptions of the Commissioners, who might have secured a
favourable position for the Difference Engine, by practising on their
good nature, or by imposing upon their imbecility.

     [30] See “The Times,” 19 Jan., 1863, and elsewhere.

It has been urged, in extenuation of the conduct of these
Commissioners, that their duty as guardians of the funds intrusted
to them, and of the interests of the Guarantors, compelled them to
practise a rigid economy.

Rigid economy is to be respected only when it is under the control of
judgment, not of favouritism. If the machinery for making arithmetical
calculations which was placed at the disposal of the Commissioners
had been properly arranged, it might have been made at once a source
of high gratification to the public and even of _profit_ to the
Exhibition. {160}

〈A COURT FOR CALCULATING MACHINES.〉

Such a group of Calculating Machines might have been placed by
themselves in a small court capable of holding a limited number
of persons. Round the walls of this court might have been hung
the drawings I had offered to lend, containing the whole of those
necessary for the Difference Engine No. 2, as well as a large number
of illustrations for the explanation of the Mechanical Notation. The
Swedish Difference Engine and my own might have been slowly making
calculations during the whole day.

This court should have been open to the public generally, except at
two or three periods of half an hour each, during which it should have
been accessible only to those who had previously secured tickets at a
shilling apiece.

During each half hour the person whom I had recommended to the
Commissioners might have given a short popular explanation of the
subject.

This attraction might have been still further increased, and additional
profit made, if a single sheet of paper had been printed containing
a woodcut of the Swedish Machine, an impression from a page of the
Tables computed and stereotyped by it at Somerset House, and also an
impression from a stereotype plate of the Difference Engine exhibited
by the Government.

A plate of the Swedish Machine is in existence in London. I am
confident that, for such a purpose, I could have procured the loan of
it for the Commissioners, and I would willingly have supplied them
with the stereotype plate from which the frontispage of the present
volume was printed, together with from ten to twenty lines of necessary
explanation.

These illustrations of machinery used for computing and printing Tables
might have been put up into packets of dozens and half dozens, and
also have been sold in single {161} sheets at the rate of one penny
each copy. There can be no doubt the sale of them would have been
very considerable. As it was, I found the woodcut representing the
Difference Engine No. 1 in great request, and during the exhibition I
had numberless applications for it; having given away my whole stock of
about 800 copies.

〈AN ASSISTANT EXPLAINING.〉

The calculating court might have held comfortably from sixty to eighty
seats. Each lecture would have produced say 3 _l._ This being repeated
three times each day, together with the sale of the woodcuts, would
have produced about 10 _l._ per day, out of which the Commissioners
would have had six shillings per day to pay the assistant who gave the
required explanations.

If the dignity of the Commissioners would not permit them to make money
by such means, they might have announced that the proceeds of the
tickets would be given to the distressed population of the Manchester
district, and there would then have been crowds of visitors.

But the rigid economy of the Commissioners, who refused to expend six
shillings a day for an attendant, although it would most probably have
produced a return of several hundred pounds, was entirely laid aside
when their patronage was to be extended to a brother official.

Captain Fowke, an officer of engineers, whose high order of
architectural talent became afterwards so well known to the public,
and whose whole time and services were retained and paid for by the
country, was employed to make a design for the Exhibition Building.

〈THE COMMISSIONERS DO A JOB.〉

The Commissioners approved of this design, which comprised two lofty
domes, uniting in themselves the threefold inconvenience of being ugly,
useless, and expensive. They then proceeded to pay him five thousand
pounds for the job. {162} This system of awarding large sums of money
to certain favoured public officers who are already paid for their
services by liberal salaries seems to be a growing evil. At the period
of the Irish famine the under-secretary of the Treasury condescended
to accept 2,500 _l._ out of the fund raised to save a famished nation.
Some inquiries, even recently, were occasionally made whether any
similar deduction will be allowed from the liberal contributions to the
sufferers by the cotton famine.

The question was raised and the practice reprobated in the House of
Commons by men of opposite party politics. Mr. Gladstone remarked:—

“If there was one rule connected with the public service which more
than any other ought to be scrupulously observed, it was this, that the
salary of a public officer, more especially if he were of high rank,
ought to cover all the services he might be called upon to render. Any
departure from this rule must be dangerous.” Hansard, vol. 101, p. 138,
1848. Supply, 14 Aug. 1848. See also “The Exposition of 1851,” 8vo., p.
217.

〈THE ADMIRALTY REFUSE.〉

The following paragraph appeared in “The Times”[31] a short time since,
under the head Naval Intelligence:—

“A reply has been received to the memorial transmitted to the Admiralty
some few days since from the inspectors employed on the iron frigate
‘Achilles,’ building at Chatham dockyard, requesting that they may
be placed on the same footing as regards increased pay as the junior
officers and mechanics working on the iron frigate for the additional
number of hours they are employed in the dockyard. The Lords of the
Admiralty intimate that they cannot accede to the wishes of the
memorialists, who are reminded that, as {163} salaried officers of
the establishment, the whole of their time is at the disposal of the
Admiralty. This decision has caused considerable dissatisfaction.”

     [31] About the 20th of May, 1863.

It appears that the Admiralty wisely adopted the principle enunciated
by Mr. Gladstone.

It may, however, not unreasonably have caused dissatisfaction to those
who had no interest to back them on finding that such large sums are
pocketed by those who are blessed with influential friends in high
quarters.

If the Commissioners had really wished to have obtained a suitable
building at a fair price their course was simple and obvious. They need
only have stated the nature and amount of accommodation required, and
then have selected half a dozen of the most eminent firms amongst our
great contractors, who would each have given them an estimate of the
plans they respectively suggested.

The Commissioners might have made it one of the conditions that they
should not be absolutely bound to give the contract to the author of
the plan accepted. But in case of not employing him a sum previously
stipulated should have been assigned for the use of the design.

By such means they would have had a choice of various plans, and if
those plans had, previously to the decision of the Commissioners, been
publicly exhibited for a few weeks, they might have been enlightened by
public criticism. Such a course would have prevented the gigantic job
they afterwards perpetrated. It could therefore find no support from
the Commissioners.

The present Commissioners, however, are fit successors to those
who in 1851 ignored the existence of the author of the “Economy of
Manufactures” and his inventions. They seem to have been deluded into
the belief that they possessed {164} the strength, as well as the
desire, quietly to strangle the Difference Engine.

It would be idle to break such butterflies upon its matchless wheels,
or to give permanence to such names by reflecting them from its
diamond-graven plates.[32] Though the steam-hammer can crack the
coating without injuring the kernel of the filbert it drops upon—the
admirable precision of its gigantic power could never be demonstrated
by exhausting its energy upon an empty nut-shell.

     [32] For the purpose of testing the steadiness and truth of the
     tools employed in forming the gun-metal plates, I had some dozen
     of them turned with a diamond point. The perfect equality of its
     cut caused the reflected light to be resolved into those beautiful
     images pointed out by Frauenhofer, and also so much admired in
     the celebrated gold buttons produced by the late Mr. Barton, the
     Comptroller of the Mint.

Peace, then, to their memory, aptly enshrined in unknown characters
within the penetralia of the temple of oblivion.

〈CONSOLATION FOR THE COMMISSIONERS.〉

These celebrities may there at last console themselves in the enjoyment
of one enviable privilege denied to them during their earthly
career—exemption from the daily consciousness of being “_found out_.”

It is, however, not quite impossible, although deciphering is a
brilliant art, that one or other of them may have heard of the dread
power of the decipherer. Having myself had some slight acquaintance
with that fascinating pursuit, it gives me real pleasure to relieve
them from this very natural fear by assuring them that not even the
most juvenile decipherer could be so stupid as to apply himself to the
interpretation of—characters known to be meaningless.

Yet there is one name amongst, but not of them—a fellow-worshipper
with myself at far other fanes, whose hands, like mine, have wielded
the hammer, and whose pen, like mine, has endeavoured to communicate
faithfully to his fellow-men {165} the measure of those truths he
has himself laboriously extracted from the material world. With such
endowments, it is impossible that _he_ could have had any cognizance of
this part of the proceedings of his colleagues.[33]

     [33] I have since learnt, with real satisfaction, that my friend,
     Mr. Fairbairn, was _not_ a member of that incompetent Commission.

〈MR. GRAVATT EXPLAINS THE ENGINE.〉

At the commencement of the Exhibition, Mr. Gravatt was constantly
present, and was so kind as to explain to many anxious inquirers the
nature and uses of the Difference Engine. This, however, interfered so
much with his professional engagements as a Civil Engineer, that it
would have been unreasonable to have expected its continuance. In fact,
as not above half a dozen spectators could see the machine at once, it
was a great sacrifice of valuable time for a very small result.

During the early part of my own examination of the Exhibition I had
many opportunities of conversing with experienced workmen, well
qualified to appreciate the workmanship of the Difference Engine; these
I frequently accompanied to its narrow cell, and pointed out to them
its use, as well as the means by which its various parts had received
their destined form.

Occasionally also I explained it to some few of my personal friends.
When Mr. Gravatt or myself were thus engaged, a considerable crowd was
often collected, who were anxious to hear about, although they could
not see, the Engine itself.

Upon one of these occasions I was insulted by impertinent questions
conveyed in a loud voice from a person at a distance in the crowd.
My taste for music, and especially for organs, was questioned. I was
charitable enough to suppose that this was an exceptional case; but
in less than a week another instance {166} occurred. After this
experience, of course, I seldom went near the Difference Engine. Mr.
Gravatt who had generously sacrificed a considerable portion of his
valuable time for the information and instruction of the public was now
imperatively called away by professional engagements, and the public
had no information whatever upon a subject on which it was really very
anxious to be instructed.

〈MR. WILMOT BUXTON EXPLAINS THE DIFFERENCE ENGINE.〉

Fortunately, however, the Exhibition took place during the long
vacation; and a friend of mine, Mr. Wilmot Buxton, of the Chancery Bar,
very frequently accompanied me in my visits. Possessing a profound
knowledge of the mathematical principles embodied in the mechanism, I
had frequently pointed out to him its nature and relations. These I
soon found he so well apprehended that I felt justified in intrusting
him with one of my keys of the machine, in order that he might have
access to it without the necessity of my presence.

Whenever he opened it for his own satisfaction or for the instruction
of his friends, he was speedily surrounded by a far larger portion of
the public than could possibly see it, but who were still attracted by
his lucid oral explanation.

It was fortunate for many of the visitors to the Exhibition that this
occurred, for the demands on his time, when present, were incessant,
and hundreds thus acquired from his explanations a popular view of the
subject.

After the close of the Exhibition, Mr. Gravatt and myself attended to
prepare the Difference Engine for its return to the Museum of King’s
College. To our great astonishment, we found that it had already been
removed to the Museum at South Kensington. Not only the Difference
Engine itself, but also the illustrations and all the unfinished
portions of exquisite workmanship which I had lent to the Exhibition
for its explanation, were gone. {167}

On Mr. Gravatt applying to the Board of Works, it was stated that the
Difference Engine itself had been placed in the Kensington Museum
because the authorities of King’s College had declined receiving it,
and immediate instructions were of course given for the restoration of
my own property.

{168}




CHAPTER XI.

THE LATE PRINCE CONSORT.


“Suum cuique.”

 Count Mensdorf mentions to the Duke of Wellington his wish to see the
 Difference Engine — An appointment made — Prince Albert expresses his
 intention of accompanying his uncle — Time of appointment altered
 — Their visit, accompanied by the Duke of Wellington — Portrait of
 Jacquard — Anecdote of Wilkie — Afghanistan arms — Extract from the
 Author’s work on the Exhibition of 1862.

I have had one opportunity of fairly estimating some portion of the
character of the late justly-lamented Prince Consort; to this I will
now venture to allude.

In 1842 Count Mensdorf visited London. A few days after I had a note
from the late Duke of Wellington, in which he informed me that on the
previous evening he had met at the palace the Queen’s uncle, Count
Mensdorf, who had expressed to the Duke his wish to see my Calculating
Engine. The Duke then inquired whether I could conveniently make some
arrangement for that purpose. I immediately wrote to the Duke, that if
he would appoint an hour on any morning of the ensuing week, I should
have great pleasure in showing and explaining the Difference Engine
to Count Mensdorf. It was afterwards arranged that on the following
Tuesday, at two o’clock, Count Mensdorf and the Duke should pay me a
visit in Dorset Street. On Monday {169} morning I received another
note from the Duke, informing me that Prince Albert had expressed his
intention to accompany Count Mensdorf in the proposed visit, and that
it would be more convenient if the hour were changed to one instead of
two o’clock.

I must freely admit that I did not greatly rejoice at this addition to
the party. I resolved, however, strictly to perform the duties thus
thrown upon me as a host, as well as all those to which Prince Albert
was entitled by his elevated position.

〈THE WOVEN PORTRAIT.〉

Before I took the Prince into the fire-proof building in which the
Difference Engine was then deposited, I asked his Royal Highness to
allow me to show him a portrait of Jacquard, which was at that time
hanging up in my drawing-room, as it would greatly assist in explaining
the nature of Calculating Machines.

When we had arrived in front of the portrait, I pointed it out as
the object to which I solicited the Prince’s attention. “Oh! that
engraving?” remarked the Duke of Wellington. “No!” said Prince Albert
to the Duke; “it is not an engraving.” I felt for a moment very great
surprise; but this was changed into a much more agreeable feeling, when
the Prince instantly added, “I have seen it before.” I felt at once
that the Prince was a “good man and true,” and I resolved that I would
not confine myself to the rigid rules of etiquette, but that I would
help him with all my heart in whatever line his inquiries might be
directed.

The portrait of Jacquard was, in fact, a sheet of woven silk, framed
and glazed, but looking so perfectly like an engraving, that it had
been mistaken for such by two members of the Royal Academy.

〈WILKIE’S CONJECTURE.〉

A short time after I became possessed of this beautiful work of
art, I met Wilkie, and invited him to come and see {170} my recent
acquisition. He called on me one morning. I placed him at a short
distance in front of the portrait, which he admired greatly. I then
asked him what he thought it was. He answered, “An engraving!” On which
I asked, “Of what kind?” To this he replied, “Line-engraving, to be
sure!” I drew him a little nearer. He then mentioned another style of
engraving. At last, having placed Wilkie close to the portrait, he
said, after a considerable pause, “Can it be lithography?”

A splendid collection of arms from Afghanistan, recently sent to me
from India by Sir Edward Ryan, was lying on the tables in one of the
rooms we passed through. These had attracted the notice of the Prince,
and on returning, the whole party examined them with the greatest
interest

I now conducted my visitors to the fire-proof building in which
the Difference Engine was placed. Prince Albert was, I understood,
sufficiently acquainted with the higher departments of mathematical
science to appreciate the influence of such an instrument on its future
progress. But the circumstance that charmed me was—his bearing towards
his uncle, Count Mensdorf. It was perfectly natural: it could be felt,
admired, and honoured—but not described.

When the sad fact of the nation’s loss became known to me, I
immediately reverted with some anxiety to a work I had published ten
years before on the Exhibition of 1851. I feared lest, in speaking
of that event, I might have committed some injustice, whilst I was
indignant at that under which I was myself suffering. I willingly
reprint it here because it contained no empty words of flattery; but
analysed the reasons which commanded our respect.

 “The merit of the original conception of the present {171} Exposition
 [1851] is insignificant in comparison with that of the efforts by
 which it was carried out, and with the importance of its practical
 results.

 “To have seen from afar its effects on the improvement, the wealth,
 and the happiness of the people—to have seized the fit moment,
 when, by the right use of the influence of an exalted station,
 it was _possible_ to overcome the deeply-rooted prejudices of
 the upper classes—to remove the still more formidable, because
 latent, impediments of party—generously to have undertaken great
 responsibility, and with indefatigable labour to have endeavoured to
 make the best out of the only materials at hand,—these are endowments
 of no ordinary kind.

 “To move in any rank of society an exception to its general rules,
 is a very difficult, and if accompanied by the consciousness of the
 situation, a very painful position to a reflecting mind.

 〈PENALTIES OF EXALTED STATION.〉

 “Whatever may be the cause—whether exalted rank, unbounded wealth,
 surpassing beauty or unrivalled wit, the renown of daring deeds, the
 magic of a world-wide fame—to all within those narrow limits the
 dangers and the penalties are great. Each exists an isolated spirit;
 each unconsciously imprisoned within its crystal globe perceives the
 colours of all external objects modified by those tints imparted to
 them by its own surrounding sphere. No change of view can teach it to
 rectify this partial judgment; throughout its earthward course the
 same undying rainbow attends to the last its parent drop.

 〈ITS SYMPATHIES.〉

 “Rarely indeed can some deep-searching mind, after long comparison,
 perceive the real colours of those translucent shells which encompass
 kindred spirits; and thus at length enable him to achromatise the
 medium which surrounds his {172} own. To one who has thus rectified
 the “colour-blindness” of his intellectual vision, how deep the
 sympathy he feels for those still involved in that hopeless obscurity
 from which he has himself escaped. None can so justly appreciate
 that sense of loneliness, that solitude of mind, which surrounds
 unquestioned eminence on its lofty throne;—none, therefore, can make
 so large an allowance for its errors;—none so skilfully assist in
 guiding its hazardous career.”

{173}




CHAPTER XII.

RECOLLECTIONS OF THE DUKE OF WELLINGTON.


 Official visit to see the Difference Engine in 1829 — Extract from
 a letter from the late General Sir William Napier — Loss of the
 troopship “Birkenhead” — The Author accompanies the Duke to the
 Exhibition of 1851 — Fixed in the crowd, the Duke plays with a child
 of two years old — The late Countess of Wilton asks a question about
 the Difference Engine — The Author’s explanation — The Duke’s remark
 — Sketch of one portion of the Duke’s intellectual character —
 University Addresses — The Duke helps a dumpy fellow to see the Queen
 — The Author saves a Master of Arts from hanging — The Duke and the
 Ninth Bridgewater Treatise — The Duke an economist of time — Character
 of the French Marshals.

My acquaintance with the late Duke of Wellington commenced in an
official visit from himself and Mr. Goulburn, the Chancellor of the
Exchequer, to inspect the drawings and works of the Difference Engine
No. 1. This was in November, 1829. Afterwards I met the Duke in private
society at the houses of one or two of his intimate friends, and
subsequently I was honoured not unfrequently by receiving him at my
own. During the Exhibition of 1851 I very often accompanied him in his
examination of the contents of that building. I made no notes of any of
the conversations, some of them highly interesting, which occurred on
such occasions, because I felt that the habit of recording privately
the conversations with our acquaintances was a breach of faith towards
the individual, and tended to destroy all confidence in society. {174}

I now perceive, when it is too late, that a rigid adherence to that
rule has deprived me of the power of relating circumstances of the
greatest interest to survivors, and of the highest credit to himself. I
should not even have adverted to the subject in the present work, had I
not observed in the fourth volume of the life of the late General Sir
Charles Napier of Scinde a passage which, if not explained, might lead
to the erroneous inference that I had myself proposed to speak to the
Duke of Wellington on a certain military subject, whereas I only did so
at the repeated desire of Sir Charles himself.

〈THE LOSS OF THE BIRKENHEAD.〉

The following is a portion of a letter from General Sir Charles Napier
to his brother, General Sir William Napier, extracted from “The Life of
Sir Charles Napier,” vol. iv., p. 347:—

 TO GENERAL W. NAPIER; 1852.

 “_May 2nd._

 “I met Babbage at Miss Burdett Coutts. He talked about the
 ‘Birkenhead,’ and was very eager, saying, ‘Cannot you speak to the
 Duke of Wellington?’ ‘No; it would seem a criticising of his conduct.’
 ‘Well, I, as a civilian, may.’ ‘Yes; and you will do good, for the
 Duke alluded to the subject at the Royal Academy dinner an hour ago.’
 Babbage did so at once, asking him to move in the matter; and the Duke
 said he would. I also spoke to Hardinge, who told me he had had a mind
 to allude to it in his speech at the dinner, but feared it might seem
 a reflection on the Duke.”

       *       *       *       *       *

 “I have been told that the Duke is only awaiting an official despatch
 from Harry Smith, or Cathcart, about the {175} ‘Birkenhead,’ to act.
 This is probable, as being like his cautious way, but, to my thinking,
 not well in this case.”

The matter referred to arose thus. Several years ago a troop-ship,
named the “Birkenhead,” was wrecked on the African coast, near the
Cape of Good Hope. A very small portion only of the troops were saved.
According to the testimony of the survivors, the discipline and order
which prevailed on board up to the final catastrophe was admirable,
and almost beyond example. If any human means could have saved those
invaluable lives, such discipline would have largely contributed to the
result.

Sharing the general regret at this severe loss, and sympathising deeply
with the feelings of the surviving relatives, it occurred to me that
very simple and inexpensive means were available, which if employed,
would at the least afford a melancholy consolation to the afflicted
relatives, might be retained with becoming pride in their families,
and would also add to the respectability of the social position of the
soldier.

Observing that military offences punished by a court-martial were made
public by being read at the head of every regiment, I suggested that in
certain cases publicity should be given by the same means to noble acts
of forbearance or of self-devotion.

In the case of the “Birkenhead,” in which ship small detachments of
several regiments were lost, I suggested that an order should be
issued, stating—

The circumstances under which the loss occurred, and the nation’s
approbation of the conduct of the departed.

That their names should be read at the head of their respective
regiments.

That an official letter, signed by the colonel or other proper {176}
officer of each regiment, describing the nature of the service under
which the loss occurred, and conveying to the nearest surviving
relative the expression of the high approbation the Government
entertained of such heroic conduct.

Such official testimonials would soothe the feelings of many a
relative, would become objects of just pride amongst the relations of
the departed, and be handed down as heir-looms in many a village circle.

〈SIR CHARLES NAPIER APPROVES.〉

I mentioned these views to several of my acquaintances, and the idea
seemed to meet with general approbation. I found my military friends
fully alive to the advantage of such a course for the benefit of the
service, and also as a consolation to surviving relatives. Amongst
others, I proposed it to the late General Sir Charles Napier. He
highly approved of the plan, about which we had several conversations.
In one of these I suggested that he should mention it to the Duke of
Wellington; to which Sir Charles replied, “No, I could not do that: you
should tell him yourself.” I smiled at the notion, not thinking that my
friend was in earnest.

A short time after I met Sir Charles Napier at a large evening party.
We were sitting together on a sofa talking: he resumed the plan I had
proposed, spoke of it with much approbation, and concluded by saying,
“You ought to tell the Duke of it.”

I replied that I had thought he was only joking when he had on a former
occasion made the same observation.

“No, indeed,” said Sir Charles; “I am serious. The Duke will attend to
what you say more than to any of us.”

“If you really think so,” I replied, “I will follow your counsel. I
hope,” I added, “the Duke may excuse me as a civilian for speaking
about it, but after such an expression of your opinion I feel bound to
take that course.” {177}

〈MENTIONED TO THE DUKE.〉

The conversation then turned upon other subjects, when shortly after
the Duke of Wellington was announced.

“There,” observed Sir Charles, “is the Duke, now go and talk to him
about it.” I promised to do so at a proper opportunity.

After the Duke had made his bow to the lady of the house, and
recognised and conversed with many of his friends, I threw myself in
his way. On the Duke shaking hands with me, I remarked that I was
particularly glad to meet him, because an idea had occurred to me in
which I thought he would take an interest. He stepped with me a little
out of the crowd, and I then stated shortly my views. The Duke paid
great attention to the subject; made several remarks upon it; and when
we separated, I felt satisfied that he took a strong interest in it.
I thought, however, that he had applied the idea rather more to the
officers, whilst my main object was the interests of the privates.

Much later in the evening I was taking some refreshment in another
room, when the Duke entering, saw and rejoined me. He reverted to the
subject; I observed that though officers and privates should have the
same official acknowledgment, yet that the Commander-in-Chief and the
Government possessed other more substantial means of benefiting the
surviving relatives of the officers than of the privates. We had some
further conversation about it, and I then felt quite satisfied that he
both understood and approved of it.

I rather think the Duke of Wellington moved in the House of Lords for
certain papers, on which he intended to found some measure of the kind;
but his death, shortly after, put an end to the question.

During the year 1851 I very frequently accompanied the Duke of
Wellington to the Exhibition, or met him there by {178} appointment at
the crystal fountain. Sometimes one or two of his particular friends,
usually ladies, were invited to join the party.

On the first occasion I spoke to one of the attending police, simply
for the purpose of facilitating our passage if we should get into
a great crowd, which, of course, did occasionally happen. In these
cases the policeman a little preceded us, and it was very interesting
to observe the sudden changes in the countenances of those whom the
constable gently touched in order to accelerate our passage. On the
first slight pressure of the policeman’s hand upon the arm of John
Bull, he looked round with indignation: but when the policeman quietly
asked him to be so good as to allow the Duke of Wellington to pass,
the muscles of John Bull’s countenance relaxed into a grateful smile:
he immediately made way, and in several cases thanked the officer
for giving him an opportunity of seeing the Duke. During the most
crowded of those days we at one period became entirely blocked up and
stationary for upwards of ten minutes. Our intelligent companion was
himself wedged in, at a short distance from us. Just in front of us
stood a woman with a child in her arms of about two years old, who was
leaning over its mother’s shoulder.

〈THE DUKE PLAYS WITH A CHILD.〉

The Duke began to play with the infant, pretending to touch its
ear with his finger, and then to touch its nose. The mother was
gratified,—the child was charmed. At last the crowd almost suddenly
broke up, and we went on. After we had advanced about a dozen paces
I said to the Duke of Wellington, “I must step back to speak to
the mother of your young friend.” I then asked her if she knew the
gentleman who had been playing with her child for the last ten minutes:
she said “No, Sir.” I told her it was the Duke of Wellington. Her
surprise and delight were equally great. {179} I desired her to tell
her boy when he grew up that, when an infant, the Duke of Wellington
had played with him. I then returned and told the Duke the object of my
mission. His approbation was indicated by a happy smile.

       *       *       *       *       *

One morning the Duke of Wellington called in Dorset Street with the
late Countess of Wilton, to whom he wished me to show the Difference
Engine. Its home was at that period in my drawing-room. We sat round it
whilst I explained its mode of action, and made it calculate some small
Table of numbers.

〈LADY WILTON’S REMARK ON DIFFERENCE ENGINE.〉

When I had concluded my explanation, Lady Wilton, addressing me, said,
“Now, Mr. Babbage, can you tell me what was your greatest difficulty
in contriving this machine?” I had never previously asked myself that
question; but I knew the nature of it well.

It arose not from the difficulty of contriving mechanism to execute
each individual movement, for I had contrived very many different modes
of executing each: but it really arose from the almost innumerable
_combinations_ amongst all these contrivances—a number so vast, that no
human mind could examine them all.

It instantly occurred to me that a similar difficulty must present
itself to a general commanding a vast army, when about to engage in a
conflict with another army of equal or of greater amount. I therefore
thought it must have been felt by the Duke of Wellington, and I
determined to make a kind of psychological experiment upon him.

Carefully abstaining from any military term, I commenced my explanation
to Lady Wilton. I soon perceived by his countenance that the Duke was
already in imagination again in Spain. I then went on boldly with
the explanation of my {180} own mechanical difficulty; and when I
had concluded, the Duke turned to Lady Wilton and said, “I know that
difficulty well.”

〈THE AUTHOR’S SKETCH OF THE DUKE’S INTELLECTUAL CHARACTER.〉

The success of this experiment induced me in a subsequent
publication[34] to give an analysis of one portion of the Duke of
Wellington’s intellectual character, although I made no mention of
his name. Many of his admirers, however, perceived at once the truth
of those views, and recognised the justice of their application. I
therefore place them before my readers in the following extract from
the work referred to:—

“It is now felt and admitted, that it is the civil capacity of the
great commander which prepares the way for his military triumphs; that
his knowledge of human nature enables him to select the fittest agents,
and to place them in the situations best adapted to their powers; that
his intimate acquaintance with all the accessories which contribute
to the health and comfort of his troops, enables him to sustain their
moral and physical energy. It has been seen that he must have studied
and properly estimated the character of his foes as well as of his
allies, and have made himself acquainted with the personal character of
the chiefs of both; and still further, that he must have scrutinized
the secret motives which regulated their respective governments.

     [34] “The Exposition of 1852;” 2nd edition, p. 222.

“When directly engaged in the operations of contending armies occupying
a wide extent of country, he must be able, with rapid glance, to
ascertain the force it is possible to concentrate upon each of many
points in any given time, and the greater or less chance of fairing
in the attempt. He must also be able to foresee, with something more
than conjecture, what amount of the enemy’s force can be brought to the
same spot in the same and in different times. With these elements {181}
he must undertake one of the most difficult of mental tasks, that of
classifying and grouping the innumerable combinations to which either
party may have recourse for purposes of attack or defence. Out of the
multitude of such combinations, which might baffle by their simple
enumeration the strongest memory, throwing aside the less important,
he must be able to discover, to fix his attention, and to act upon the
most favourable. Finally, when the course thus selected having been
pursued, and perhaps partially carried out, is found to be entirely
deranged by one of those many chances inseparable from such operations,
then, in the midst of action, he must be able suddenly to organise a
different system of operations, new to all other minds, yet possibly,
although unconsciously, anticipated by his own.

“The genius that can meet and overcome such difficulties _must_ be
intellectual, and would, under different circumstances, have been
distinguished in many a different career.

“Nor even would it be very surprising that such a commander, estimating
justly the extent of his own powers, and conscious of having planned
the best combinations of which his mind is capable, should, having
issued his orders, calmly lie down on the eve of the approaching
conflict, and find in sleep that bodily restoration so indispensable
to the full exercise of his faculties in the mighty struggle about to
ensue.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon after the Queen came to the throne, the two Universities presented
addresses to her Majesty. I accompanied that of Cambridge. The
deputation was very numerous, and much unseemly pushing took place. I
recollect a very short dumpy fellow pushing much more energetically
than any other, for whom I made way, as I retired from the strife in
which I was unwillingly involved. He not only pushed, but was {182}
continually jumping up like a parched pea in a heated frying-pan:
his object being to get a glimpse of her Majesty, and the effect
accomplished being to alight on the toes or graze the heels of his
colleagues.

I retired into a window close to the end of the position occupied by
the gentlemen-at-arms. The Duke of Wellington, who had a short time
before, as Chancellor of the University of Oxford, presented the
address of that body, still remained in the state apartments. He joined
me in the recess of the window, and we entered into conversation.

〈THE DUKE ASSISTS A PUSHING M.A.〉

After a time the little dumpy fellow, who had been regularly turned out
of the crowd for his pushing, came up to us, and, mistaking the Duke
of Wellington for a beef-eater or some palace attendant, complained,
almost in tears, that he wanted to see the Queen, and that they had
pushed him out, and that he had not been able to see the Queen.

The Duke very good-naturedly said he would take him to a place where he
could see her Majesty without being pushed about. Accordingly, the Duke
led him behind the gentlemen-at-arms to a situation in which the little
man’s wish was gratified, and then returned with him to the window, and
resumed the conversation.

On another occasion the University of Cambridge presented an address to
the Queen at Buckingham Palace. The crowd was very great. On descending
one of the flights of stairs, a short Master of Arts was unluckily
caught by the string of his gown hooking itself upon one of the large
door-handles. He was carried off his legs by the advancing rush. To
bring back the pendant Master of Arts a single inch was impossible
from the pressure onwards. So whilst two or three of his colleagues
with difficulty supported him, I took out my pen-knife and cut the
imprisoning ribbon. {183}

〈ALL PARCELS REJECTED.〉

When I published the “Ninth Bridgewater Treatise,” I sent my servant
to Apsley House with a presentation copy for the Duke of Wellington.
The next morning at breakfast my servant informed me that the porter
absolutely refused to take it in, although he stated from whom it came.

I remarked to my brother-in-law, who was staying with me, that it was
a very odd circumstance, and inquired what was to be done. He replied,
“When a man refuses to receive a parcel, nothing more can be done.”
I then observed, that if any other person than the Duke had done so,
I should have taken no further step; but, I added, that I knew his
character so well, that I was confident there was really a good and
sufficient reason, although I could not conjecture its nature.

After breakfast I wrote a short note to the Duke, mentioning the
circumstance, taking for granted that it arose entirely from some
misconception of his orders. I then requested him not to take the
trouble of writing to me to explain it; but added that I would send the
volume to Apsley House on the following morning, when, I had no doubt,
the mistaken interpretation of his orders would have been rectified.

About three o’clock the same day a servant of the Duke’s brought me a
note, inquiring if there were any answer to take back. The Duke stated
in his note that letters, books, parcels, maps, and even merchandise,
were continually sent to him for the purpose of being forwarded to all
parts of the world. This, he observed, threw upon his house-steward so
great a responsibility, that he had been compelled to give directions
that no parcel should be received at Apsley House without a written
order with his signature, like that which he now enclosed. As the
Duke’s servant was waiting, I gave him the book, which he took back,
and I retained the slip of paper for any other similar occasion. {184}

〈THE DUKE DRESSED IN HIS CARRIAGE.〉

The Duke was habitually an economist of time. One day I was going
homeward in a cab to dress for a dinner engagement, when I thought
I observed him riding down St. James’s Street towards the House of
Lords. On reaching the house of the friend with whom I was to dine, I
found that the Duke of Wellington was expected at dinner. He arrived
punctually. In the course of the evening I took an opportunity of
asking him whether I was mistaken in supposing I had seen him a short
time before dinner riding down St. James’s Street. I then expressed my
surprise at the rapidity of his movements in getting back to Apsley
House in time to dress and be punctual to his engagement. He said, “No,
I did not do that; I had ordered my carriage to meet me at the House of
Lords, and I changed my dress whilst it was bringing me here.”

The most interesting conversations generally occurred when only a few
of his intimate friends met together.

On one of these occasions, at a very small dinner-party, the characters
of the French marshals became the subject of conversation. The Duke,
being appealed to, pointed out freely their various qualities, and
assigned to each his peculiar excellence.

〈CURIOUS QUESTION—THE DUKE’S REPLY.〉

One question, the most highly interesting of all, naturally presented
itself to our minds. I was speculating how I could, without
impropriety, suggest it, when, to my great relief, one of the party,
addressing the Duke, said—

“Well, sir, how was it that, with such various great qualities, you
licked them all, one after another?”

The Duke was evidently taken by surprise. He paused for a moment or
two, and then said—

“Well, I don’t know exactly how it was; but I think that if any
unexpected circumstance occurred in the midst of a {185} battle, which
deranged its whole plan, I could perhaps organize another plan more
quickly than most of them.”

This strongly confirms the view of the Duke of Wellington’s character
given in the preceding pages. After examining all the more important
combinations which might be made for the conflict, and having selected
those which appeared the best, it is quite natural, if any accident
deranged the original plan, that he should perceive, more quickly than
another commander, one amongst the many plans previously rejected which
was immediately applicable to the new and unexpected circumstances.

{186}




CHAPTER XIII.

RECOLLECTIONS OF WOLLASTON, DAVY, AND ROGERS.


 Secretaryship of Royal Society — Mr. Murray of Albemarle Street —
 Remark on “The Decline of Science” — Dr. Somerville — Explanation of
 a Job of Sir Humphry Davy — History of the Thaumatrope — Introduction
 to Mr. Rogers — The Poet nearly run over — Anecdote of the “Economy of
 Manufactures” — Teaches the Author how to live for ever — Rapidity of
 composition amongst Poets — Different effects of Imagination in the
 Poet and the Philosopher — Consultation about the Author’s unwritten
 Novel.

In 1826, one of the secretaryships of the Royal Society became vacant.
Dr. Wollaston and several others of the leading members of the Society
and of the Council wished that I should be appointed. This would have
been the more agreeable to me, because my early friend Herschel was at
that time the senior Secretary.

This arrangement was agreed to by Sir H. Davy, and I left town with the
full assurance that I was to have the appointment. In the mean time
Sir H. Davy summoned a Council at an unusual hour—eight o’clock in
the evening—for a special purpose, namely, some arrangement about the
Treasurer’s accounts.

After the business relating to the Treasurer was got through, Sir H.
Davy observed that there was a secretaryship vacant, and he proposed to
fill it up.

〈SIR HUMPHRY DAVY’S DISCOURSES.〉

Dr. Wollaston then asked Sir Humphry Davy if he claimed the nomination
as a right of the President, to which {187} Sir H. Davy replied that
he did, and then nominated Mr. Children. The President, as president,
has no such right; and even if he had possessed it, he had promised Mr.
Herschel that I should be his colleague. There were upright and eminent
men on that council; yet no one of them had the moral courage to oppose
the President’s dictation, or afterwards to set it aside on the ground
of its irregularity.

A few years after, whilst I was on a visit at Wimbledon Park, Dr. and
Mrs. Somerville came down to spend the day. Dr. Somerville mentioned
a very pleasant dinner he had had with the late Mr. John Murray of
Albemarle Street, and also a conversation relating to my book “On the
Decline of Science in England.” Mr. Murray felt hurt at a remark I
had made on himself (page 107) whilst criticizing a then unexplained
job of Sir Humphry Davy’s. Dr. Somerville assured Mr. Murray that he
knew me intimately, and that if I were convinced that I had done him
an injustice, nobody would be more ready to repair it. A few days
after, Mr. Murray put into Dr. Somerville’s hands papers explaining the
whole of the transaction. These papers were now transferred to me. On
examining them I found ample proof of what I had always suspected. The
observation I had made which pained Mr. Murray fell to the ground as
soon as the real facts were known, and I offered to retract it in any
suitable manner. One plan I proposed was to print a supplemental page,
and have it bound up with all the remaining copies of the “Decline of
Science.”

Mr. Murray was satisfied with my explanation, but did not wish me
to take the course I proposed, at least, not at that time. Various
objections may have presented themselves to his mind, but the affair
was adjourned with the understanding that at some future time I should
explain the real state of {188} the facts which had led to this
misinterpretation of Mr. Murray’s conduct.

〈EXPLANATION OF THAT JOB.〉

The true history of the affair was this: Being on the Council of the
Royal Society in 1827, I observed in our accounts a charge of 381 _l._
5 _s._ as paid to Mr. Murray for 500 copies of Sir Humphry Davy’s
Discourses.

I asked publicly at the Council for an explanation of this item. The
answer given by Dr. Young and others was—

“That the Council had agreed to purchase these volumes at that price,
in order to _induce_ Mr. Murray to print the President’s speeches.”

To this I replied that such an explanation was entirely inadmissible.
I then showed that even allowing a very high price for composing,
printing, and paper, if the Council had wished to print 500 copies of
those Discourses they could have done it themselves for 150 _l._ at the
outside. I could not extract a single word to elucidate this mystery,
about which, however, I had my own ideas.

It appeared by the papers put into my hands that Sir Humphry Davy had
applied to Mr. Murray, and had sold him the copyright of the Discourses
for 500 guineas, one of the conditions being that the Royal Society
should purchase of him 500 copies at the trade price.

Mr. Murray paid Sir H. Davy the 500 guineas in three bills at six,
twelve, and eighteen months. These bills passed through Drummond’s (Sir
H. Davy’s banker), and I have had them in my own hands for examination.

Thus it appears that Mr. Murray treated the whole affair as a matter
of business, and acted in this purchase in his usual liberal manner.
I have had in my hand a statement of the winding-up of that account
copied from Mr. Murray’s books, and I find that he was a considerable
loser by his {189} purchase. Sir H. Davy, on the other hand, contrived
to transfer between three and four hundred pounds from the funds of the
Royal Society into his own pocket.[35]

     [35] See “Decline of Science in England,” p. 105. 8vo. 1830.

It was my determination to have called for an explanation of this
affair at the election of our President and officers at our anniversary
on the 30th November if Sir H. Davy had been again proposed as
President in 1827.


_The Thaumatrope._

One day Herschel, sitting with me after dinner, amusing himself by
spinning a pear upon the table, suddenly asked whether I could show him
the two sides of a shilling at the same moment.

I took out of my pocket a shilling, and holding it up before the
looking-glass, pointed out _my_ method. “No,” said my friend, “that
won’t do;” then spinning my shilling upon the table, he pointed out
_his_ method of seeing both sides at once. The next day I mentioned
the anecdote to the late Dr. Fitton, who a few days after brought me a
beautiful illustration of the principle. It consisted of a round disc
of card suspended between the two pieces of sewing-silk. These threads
being held between the finger and thumb of each hand, were then made to
turn quickly, when the disc of card, of course, revolved also.

Upon one side of this disc of card was painted a bird; upon the
other side, an empty bird-cage. On turning the thread rapidly, the
bird appeared to have got inside the cage. We soon made numerous
applications, as a rat on one side and a trap upon the other, &c. It
was shown to Captain Kater, Dr. Wollaston, and many of our friends, and
was, after the lapse of a short time, forgotten. {190}

〈THE THAUMATROPE: ITS RETRIBUTION.〉

Some months after, during dinner at the Royal Society Club, Sir Joseph
Banks being in the chair, I heard Mr. Barrow, then Secretary to the
Admiralty, talking very loudly about a wonderful invention of Dr.
Paris, the object of which I could not quite understand. It was called
the thaumatrope, and was said to be sold at the Royal Institution,
in Albemarle-street. Suspecting that it had some connection with our
unnamed toy, I went the next morning and purchased, for seven shillings
and sixpence, a thaumatrope, which I afterwards sent down to Slough
to the late Lady Herschel. It was precisely the thing which her son
and Dr. Fitton had contributed to invent, which amused all their
friends for a time and had then been forgotten. There was however _one_
additional thaumatrope made afterwards. It consisted of the usual disc
of paper. On one side was represented a thaumatrope (the design upon it
being a penny-piece) with the motto, “How to turn a penny.”

On the other side was a gentleman in black, with his hands held out in
the act of spinning a thaumatrope, the motto being, “A new trick from
Paris.”

After my contest for Finsbury was decided, Mr. Rogers the banker, and
the brother of the poet, who had been one of my warmest supporters,
proposed accompanying me to the hustings at the declaration of the
poll. He had also invited a party of some of the most influential
electors of his district to dine with him in the course of the week,
in order that they might meet me, and consider about measures for
supporting me at the next opportunity.

〈THE POET AND PHILOSOPHER AT A CROSSING.〉

On a cold drizzling rainy day in November the final state of the poll
was declared. Mr. Rogers took me in his carriage to the hustings, and
caught a cold, which seemed at first unimportant. On the day of the
dinner, when we met at {191} Mr. Rogers’s, who resided at Islington,
he was unable to leave his bed. Miss Rogers, his sister, who lived with
him, and his brother the poet, received us, quite unconscious of the
dangerous condition of their relative, who died the next day.

Thus commenced a friendship with both of my much-valued friends
which remained unruffled by the slightest wave until their lamented
loss. Miss Rogers removed to a house in the Regent’s Park, in which
the paintings by modern artists collected by her elder brother, and
increased by her own judicious taste, were arranged. The society at
that house comprised all that was most eminent in literature and in
art. The adjournment after her breakfasts to the delightful verandah
overlooking the Park still clings to my fading memory, and the voices
of her poet brother, of Jeffrey, and of Sidney Smith still survive in
the vivid impressions of their wisdom and their wit.

I do not think the genuine kindness of the poet’s character was
sufficiently appreciated. I occasionally walked home with him from
parties during the first years of our acquaintance. In later years,
when his bodily strength began to fail, I always accompanied him,
though sometimes not without a little contest.

I have frequently walked with him from his sister’s house, in the
Regent’s Park, to his own in St. James’s Place, and he has sometimes
insisted upon returning part of the way home with me.

On one of those occasions we were crossing a street near Cavendish
Square: a cart coming rapidly round the corner, I almost dragged him
over. As soon as we were safe, the poet said, very much as a child
would, “There, now, that was all your fault; you would come with
me, and so I was nearly run over.” However, I found less and less
resistance to my {192} accompanying him, and only regretted that I
could not be constantly at his side on those occasions.

Soon after the publication of the “Economy of Manufactures,” Mr. Rogers
told me that he had met one evening, at a very fashionable party, a
young dandy, with whom he had had some conversation. The poet had asked
him whether he had read that work. To this his reply was, “Yes: it is a
very nice book—just the kind of book that anybody could have written.”

〈HOW TO LIVE FOR EVER.〉

One day, when I was in great favour with the poet, we were talking
about the preservation of health. He told me he would teach me how to
live for ever; for which I thanked him in a compliment after his own
style, rather than in mine. I answered, “Only embalm me in your poetry,
and it is done.” Mr. Rogers invited me to breakfast with him the next
morning, when he would communicate the receipt. We were alone, and I
enjoyed a very entertaining breakfast. The receipt consisted mainly
of cold ablutions and the frequent use of the flesh brush. Mr. Rogers
himself used the latter to a moderate extent regularly, three times
every day—before he dressed himself, when he dressed for dinner, and
before he got into bed. About six or eight strokes of the flesh-brush
completed each operation. We then adjourned to a shop, where I
purchased a couple of the proper brushes, which I used for several
years, and still use occasionally, with, I believe, considerable
advantage.

〈RAPIDITY OF COMPOSITION.〉

Once, at Mr. Rogers’s table, I was talking with one of his guests about
the speed with which some authors composed, and the slowness of others.
I then turned to our host, and, much to his surprise, inquired how many
lines a-day on the average a poet usually wrote. My friend, when his
astonishment had a little subsided, very good-naturedly gave us the
result of his own experience. He said that he had never written {193}
more than four[36] lines of verse in any one day of his life. This I
can easily understand; for Mr. Rogers’ taste was the most fastidious,
as well as the most just, I ever met with. Another circumstance also, I
think, contributed to this slowness of composition.

     [36] I am not quite certain that the number was four; but I am
     absolutely certain that it was either four or six.

An author may adopt either of two modes of composing. He may write
off the whole of his work roughly, so as to get upon paper the plan
and general outline, without attending at all to the language. He may
afterwards study minutely every clause of each sentence, and then every
word of each clause.

Or the author may finish and polish each sentence as soon as it is
written.

This latter process was, I think, employed by Mr. Rogers, at least in
his poetry.

He then told us that Southey composed with much greater rapidity
than himself, as well in poetry as in prose. Of the latter Southey
frequently wrote a great many pages before breakfast.

Once, at a large dinner party, Mr. Rogers was speaking of an
inconvenience arising from the custom, then commencing, of having
windows formed of one large sheet of plate-glass. He said that a short
time ago he sat at dinner with his back to one of these single panes of
plate-glass: it appeared to him that the window was wide open, and such
was the force of imagination, that he actually caught cold.

〈DIFFERENT EFFECTS OF IMAGINATION.〉

It so happened that I was sitting just opposite to the poet. Hearing
this remark, I immediately said, “Dear me, how odd it is, Mr. Rogers,
that you and I should make such a very different use of the faculty
of imagination. When I go to the house of a friend in the country,
and unexpectedly {194} remain for the night, having no night-cap,
I should naturally catch cold. But by tying a bit of pack-thread
tightly round my head, I go to sleep imagining that I have a night-cap
on; consequently I catch no cold at all.” This sally produced much
amusement in all around, who supposed I had improvised it; but, odd
as it may appear, it is a practice I have often resorted to. Mr.
Rogers, who knew full well the respect and regard I had for him, saw
at once that I was relating a simple fact, and joined cordially in the
merriment it excited.

In the latter part of Mr. Rogers’s life, when, being unable to walk,
he was driven in his carriage round the Regent’s Park, he frequently
called at my door, and, when I was able, I often accompanied him in his
drive. On some one of these occasions, when I was unable to accompany
him, I put into his hands a parcel of proof-sheets of a work I was then
writing, thinking they might amuse him during his drive, and that I
might profit by his criticism. Some years before, I had consulted him
about a novel I had proposed to write solely for the purpose of making
money to assist me in completing the Analytical Engine. I breakfasted
alone with the poet, who entered fully into the subject. I proposed
to give up a twelvemonth to writing the novel, but I determined not
to commence it unless I saw pretty clearly that I could make about
5,000 _l._ by the sacrifice of my time. The novel was to have been in
three volumes, and there would probably have been reprints of another
work in two volumes. Both of these works would have had graphic
illustrations. The poet gave me much information on all the subjects
connected with the plan, and amongst other things, observed that when
he published his beautifully illustrated work on Italy, that he had
paid 9,000 _l._ out of his own pocket before he received any return for
that work.

{195}




CHAPTER XIV.

RECOLLECTIONS OF LAPLACE, BIOT, AND HUMBOLDT.


 My First Visit to Paris — Anecdote of the fifty-two Eggs — Mistake
 about Woodhouse — Fourier — Biot — Drawings of the Difference Engine
 — Strong characteristic of Humboldt’s mind — English Clergyman at
 Paris — Great Meeting of Philosophers at Berlin, 1828 — Introduces the
 Author to Magnus and Derichlet — Puts the Englishman upon the Dining
 Committee — Conversation in the Linden Walk — Humboldt’s study —
 Various members of the family of Buonaparte — Lucien and his Children
 — Louis, the King of Holland — Joseph, the King of Spain — His second
 Daughter married to a Son of Louis — Their taste — Drawings and
 Lithographs — Her Death.

My first visit to Paris was made in company with my friend John
Herschel. On reaching Abbeville, we wanted breakfast, and I undertook
to order it. Each of us usually required a couple of eggs. I preferred
having mine moderately boiled, but my friend required his to be boiled
quite hard. Having explained this matter to the waiter, I concluded
by instructing him that each of us required two eggs thus cooked,
concluding my order with the words, “pour chacun deux.”

The garçon ran along the passage half way towards the kitchen, and then
called out in his loudest tone—

“Il faut faire bouillir cinquante-deux œufs pour Messieurs les
Anglais.” I burst into such a fit of uncontrollable laughter at this
absurd misunderstanding of _chacun deux_, for _cinquante-deux_, that it
was some time before I could explain it to Herschel, and but for his
running into the kitchen to {196} countermand it, the half hundred of
eggs would have assuredly been simmering over the fire.

A few days after our arrival in Paris, we dined with Laplace, where we
met a large party, most of whom were members of the Institut. The story
had already arrived at at Paris, having rapidly passed through several
editions.

〈FIFTY-TWO EGGS.〉

To my great amusement, one of the party told the company that, a few
days before, two young Englishman being at Abbeville, had ordered
fifty-two eggs to be boiled for their breakfast, and that they ate up
every one of them, as well as a large pie which was put before them.

My next neighbour at dinner asked me if I thought it probable. I
replied, that there was no absurdity a young Englishman would not
occasionally commit.

One morning Herschel and I called on Laplace, who spoke to us of
various English works on mathematical subjects. Amongst others, he
mentioned with approbation, “Un ouvrage de vous deux.” We were both
quite at a loss to know to what work he referred. Herschel and I had
not written any joint work, although we had together translated the
work of Lacroix. The volume of the “Memoirs of the Analytical Society,”
though really our joint production, was not known to be such, and it
was also clear that Laplace did not refer to that work. Perceiving
that we did not recognise the name of the author to whom he referred,
Laplace varied the pronunciation by calling him _vous deux_; the first
word being pronounced as the French word “vous,” and the second as the
English word “deuce.”

Upon further explanation, it turned out that Laplace meant to speak of
a work published by Woodhouse, whose name is in the pronunciation of
the French so very like _vous deux_. {197}

〈FOURIER AND BIOT.〉

Poisson, Fourier, and Biot were amongst my earliest friends in Paris.
Fourier, then Secretary of the Institute, had accompanied the first
Napoleon in his expedition to Egypt. His profound acquaintance with
analysis remains recorded in his works. His unaffected and genial
manner, the vast extent of his acquirements, and his admirable taste
conspicuous even in the apartments he inhabited, were most felt by
those who were honoured by his friendship.

With M. Biot I became acquainted in early life; he was then surrounded
by a happy family. In my occasional visits to Paris I never omitted
an opportunity of paying my respects to him: when deprived of those
supports and advanced in life, he still earnestly occupied himself in
carrying out the investigations of his earlier years.

His son, M. Biot, a profound oriental scholar, who did me the honour of
translating ‘The Economy of Manufactures,’ died many years before his
father.

In one of my visits to Paris, at a period when beards had become
fashionable amongst a certain class of my countrymen, I met Biot. After
our first greeting, looking me full in the face, he said, “My dear
friend, you are the best shaved man in Europe.”

〈BIOT AND THE DIFFERENCE ENGINE.〉

At a later period I took with me to Paris the complete drawings of
Difference Engine No. 2. As soon as I had hung them up round my own
apartments to explain them to my friends I went to the College de
France, where M. Biot resided. I mentioned to him the fact, and said
that if it was a subject in which he was interested, and had leisure to
look at these drawings, I should have great pleasure in bringing them
to him, and giving him any explanation that he might desire. I told
him, however, that I was fully aware how much the time of every man who
really adds to science must be {198} occupied, and that I made this
proposal rather to satisfy my own mind that I had not neglected one
of my oldest friends than in the expectation that he had time for the
examination of this new subject.

The answer of my friend was remarkable. After thanking me in the
warmest terms for this mark of friendship, he explained to me that the
effect of age upon his own mind was to render the pursuit of any new
inquiry a matter of slow and painful effort; but that in following
out the studies of his youth he was not so much impeded. He added
that in those subjects he could still study with satisfaction, and
even make advances in them, assisted in the working out of his views
experimentally by the aid of his younger friends.

I was much gratified by this unreserved expression of the state of
the case, and I am sure those younger men who so kindly assisted the
aged philosopher will be glad to know that their assistance was duly
appreciated.

The last time during M. Biot’s life that I visited Paris I went, as
usual, to the College de France. I inquired of the servant who opened
the door after the state of M. Biot’s health, which was admitted to be
feeble. I then asked whether he was well enough to see an old friend.
Biot himself had heard the latter part of this conversation. Coming
into the passage he seized my hand and said “My dear friend, I would
see you even if I were dying.”


_Alexander Humboldt._

One of the most remarkable characteristics of Humboldt’s mind was, that
he not merely loved and pursued science for its own sake, but that he
derived pleasure from assisting with his information and advice any
other inquirer, however humble, who might need it. {199}

〈HUMBOLDT AT PARIS.〉

In one of my visits to Paris, Humboldt was sitting with me when a
friend of mine, an English clergyman, who had just arrived in Paris,
and had only two days to spare for it, called upon me to ask my
assistance about getting access to certain MSS. Putting into Humboldt’s
hand a tract lying on my table, I asked him to excuse me for a few
minutes whilst I gave what advice I could to my countryman.

My friend told me that he wanted to examine a MS., which he was
informed was in a certain library in a certain street in Paris: that he
knew nobody in the city to help him in his mission.

Humboldt having heard this statement, came over to us and said, “If you
will introduce me to your friend, I can put him in the way of seeing
the MSS. he is in search of.” He then explained that the MSS. had been
removed to another library in Paris, and proposed to give my friend
a note of introduction to the librarian, and mentioned other MSS.
and other libraries in which he would find information upon the same
subject.

Many years after, being at Vienna, I heard that Humboldt was at
Töplitz, a circumstance which induced me to visit that town. On my
arrival I found he had left it a few days before on his return to
Berlin. In the course of a few days, I followed him to that city, and
having arrived in the middle of the day, I took apartments in the
Linden Walk, and got all my travelling apparatus in order; I then
went out to call on Humboldt. Finding that he had gone to dine with
his brother William, who resided at a short distance from Berlin, I
therefore merely left my card.

The next morning at seven o’clock, before I was out of bed, I received
a very kind note from Humboldt, to ask me to breakfast with him at
nine. In a postscript he added, “What {200} are the moving molecules
of Robert Brown?” These atoms of dead matter in rapid motion, when
examined under the microscope, were then exciting great attention
amongst philosophers.

I met at breakfast several of Humboldt’s friends, with whose names and
reputation I was well acquainted.

〈GREAT MEETING OF GERMAN PHILOSOPHERS.〉

Humboldt himself expressed great pleasure that I should have visited
Berlin to attend the great meeting of German philosophers, who in a
few weeks were going to assemble in that capital. I assured him that
I was quite unaware of the intended meeting, and had directed my
steps to Berlin merely to enjoy the pleasure of his society. I soon
perceived that this meeting of philosophers on a very large scale,
supported by the King and by all the science of Germany, might itself
have a powerful influence upon the future progress of human knowledge.
Amongst my companions at the breakfast-table were Derichlet and Magnus.
In the course of the morning Humboldt mentioned to me that his own
duties required his attendance on the King every day at three o’clock,
and having also in his hands the organization of the great meeting of
philosophers, it would not be in his power to accompany me as much
as he wished in seeing the various institutions in Berlin. He said
that, under these circumstances, he had asked his two young friends,
Derichlet and Magnus, to supply his place. During many weeks of my
residence in Berlin, I felt the daily advantage of this thoughtful
kindness of Humboldt. Accompanied by one or other, and frequently by
both, of my young friends, I saw everything to the best advantage,
and derived an amount of information and instruction which under less
favourable circumstances it would have been impossible to have obtained.

The next morning, I again breakfasted with Humboldt. {201} On the
previous day I had mentioned that I was making a collection of the
signs employed in map-making. I now met Von Buch and General Ruhl, both
of whom were profoundly acquainted with that subject. I had searched in
vain for any specimen of a map shaded upon the principle of lines of
equal elevation. Von Buch the next morning gave me an engraving of a
small map upon that principle, which was, I believe, at that time the
only one existing.

After breakfast we went into Humboldt’s study to look at something he
wished to show us. In turning over his papers, which, like my own, were
lying apparently in great disorder upon the table, he picked up the
cover of a letter on which was written a number of names in different
parallel columns. “That,” he observed incidentally, “is for you.” After
he had shown us the object of our visit to his sanctum, he reverted to
the envelop which he put into my hands, explaining that he had grouped
roughly together for my use all the remarkable men then in Berlin, and
several of those who were expected.

These he had arranged in classes:—Men of science, men of letters,
sculptors, painters, and artists generally, instrument-makers, &c. This
list I found very convenient for reference.

〈THE AUTHOR PUT ON THE DINING COMMITTEE.〉

When the time of the great meeting approached, it became necessary to
prepare the arrangements for the convenience of the assembled science
of Europe. One of the first things, of course, was the important
question, how they were to dine? A committee was therefore appointed
to make experiment by dining successively at each of the three or four
hotels competing for the honour of providing a table d’hôte for the
savans.

Humboldt put me on that committee, remarking, that an Englishman always
appreciates a good dinner. The committee performed their agreeable duty
in a manner quite {202} satisfactory to themselves, and I hope, also,
to the digestions of the Naturforschers.

〈CONVERSATION IN THE LINDEN WALK.〉

During the meeting much gaiety was going on at Berlin. One evening
previous to our parties, I was walking in the Linden Walk with
Humboldt, discussing the singularities of several of our learned
acquaintance. My companion made many acute and very amusing remarks;
some of these were a little caustic, but not one was ill-natured. I
had contributed a very small and much less brilliant share to this
conversation, when the clock striking, warned us that the hour for our
visits had arrived. I never shall forget the expression of archness
which lightened up Humboldt’s countenance when shaking my hand he said,
in English, “My dear friend, I think it may be as well that we should
not speak of each other until we meet again.” We then each kept our
respective engagements, and met again at the most recherché of all, a
concert at Mendelssohn’s.


_Of the Buonaparte Family._

From my father’s house on the coast, near Teignmouth, we could, with a
telescope, see every ship which entered Torbay. When the “Bellerophon”
anchored, the news was rapidly spread that Napoleon was on board.
On hearing the rumour, I put a small telescope into my pocket, and,
mounting my horse, rode over to Torbay. A crowd of boats surrounded the
ship, then six miles distant; but, by the aid of my glass, I saw upon
the quarter-deck that extraordinary man, with many members of whose
family I subsequently became acquainted. Of those who are no more I may
without impropriety say a few words.

My first acquaintance with several branches of the family {203} of
Napoleon Buonaparte arose under the following circumstances:—

〈LUCIEN BUONAPARTE.〉

When his elder brother Lucien, to avoid the necessity of accepting a
kingdom, fled from his imperial brother, and took refuge in England,
his position was either not well understood, or, perhaps, was entirely
mistaken. Lucien seems to have been looked upon with suspicion by our
Government, and was placed in the middle of England under a species of
espionage.

Political parties then ran high, and he did not meet with those
attentions which his varied and highly-cultivated tastes, especially in
the fine arts, entitled him to receive, as a stranger in a foreign land.

A family connection of mine, residing in Worcestershire, was in the
habit of visiting Lucien Buonaparte. Thus, in my occasional visits
to my brother-in-law’s place, I became acquainted with the Prince of
Canino. In after-years, when he occasionally visited London, I had
generally the pleasure of seeing him.

In 1828 I met at Rome the eldest son of Lucien, who introduced me to
his sisters, Lady Dudley Stuart and the Princess Gabrielli.

〈LOUIS, THE KING OF HOLLAND.〉

In the same year I became acquainted, at Bologna, with the Princess
d’Ercolano, another daughter of Lucien, whom I afterwards met at
Florence, at the palace of her uncle Louis, the former king of Holland.
During a residence of several months in that city I was a frequent
guest at the family table of the Compte St. Leu. One of his sons
had married the Princess Charlotte, the second daughter of the King
of Spain, a most accomplished, excellent, and charming person. They
reminded me much of a sensible English couple, in the best class of
English society. Both had great taste in the fine {204} arts. The
prince had a workshop at the top of the palace, in which he had a
variety of tools and a lithographic printing press. Occasionally, in
the course of their morning drives, some picturesque scene, in that
beautiful country, would arrest their attention. Stopping the carriage,
they would select a favourable spot, and the princess would then make a
sketch of it.

At other times they would spend the evening, the prince in
extemporizing an imaginary scene, which he described to his wife, who,
with admirable skill, embodied upon paper the tasteful conceptions
of her husband. These sketches then passed up to the workshop of the
Prince, were transferred to stone, and in a few days lithographic
impressions descended to the drawing-room. I fortunately possess some
of these impressions, which I value highly, not only as the productions
of an amiable and most accomplished lady, but of one who did not shrink
from the severer duties of life, and died in fulfilling them.

After the melancholy loss of her husband, the Princess Charlotte
remained with her father, who resided at one period in the Regent’s
Park, where I from time to time paid my respects to them. Occasionally
I received them at my own house. One summer letters from Florence
reached them, announcing the dangerous illness of the Comte de St.
Leu. The daughter of Joseph immediately set out alone for Florence to
minister to the comfort of her uncle and father-in-law. On her return
from Italy she was attacked by cholera and died in the south of France.

{205}




CHAPTER XV.

EXPERIENCE BY WATER.


 Shooting Sea-birds — Walking on the Water — A Screw being loose — The
 Author nearly drowned — Adventure in the Thames Tunnel — Descent in a
 Diving-bell — Plan for Submarine Navigation.

The grounds surrounding my father’s house, near Teignmouth, extended to
the sea. The cliffs, though lofty, admitted at one point of a descent
to the beach, of which I very frequently availed myself for the purpose
of bathing. One Christmas when I was about sixteen I determined to see
if I could manage a gun. I accordingly took my father’s fowling-piece,
and climbing with it down to the beach, I began to look about for the
large sea-birds which I thought I might have a chance of hitting.

I fired several charges in vain. At last, however, I was fortunate
enough to hit a sea-bird called a diver; but it fell at some distance
into the sea: I had no dog to get it out for me; the sea was rough, and
no boat was within reach; also it was snowing.

So I took advantage of a slight recess in the rock to protect my
clothes from the snow, undressed, and swam out after my game, which I
succeeded in capturing. The next day, having got the cook to roast it,
I tried to eat it; but this was by no means an agreeable task, so for
the future I left the sea-birds to the quiet possession of their own
dominion. {206}

〈WALKING IN THE WATER.〉

Shortly after this, whilst residing on the beautiful banks of the Dart,
I constantly indulged in swimming in its waters. One day an idea struck
me, that it was possible, by the aid of some simple mechanism, to walk
upon the water, or at least to keep in a vertical position, and have
head, shoulders, and arms above water.

My plan was to attach to each foot two boards closely connected
together by hinges themselves fixed to the sole of the shoe. My theory
was, that in lifting up my leg, as in the act of walking, the two
boards would close up towards each other; whilst on pushing down my
foot, the water would rush between the boards, cause them to open out
into a flat surface, and thus offer greater resistance to my sinking in
the water.

I took a pair of boots for my experiment, and cutting up a couple of
old useless volumes with very thick binding, I fixed the boards by
hinges in the way I proposed. I placed some obstacle between the two
flaps of each book to prevent them from approaching too nearly to each
other so as to impede their opening by the pressure of the water.

I now went down to the river, and thus prepared, walked into the water.
I then struck out to swim as usual, and found little difficulty. Only
it seemed necessary to keep the feet farther apart. I now tried the
grand experiment. For a time, by active exertion of my legs, I kept my
head and shoulders above water and sometimes also my arms. I was now
floating down the river with the receding tide, sustained in a vertical
position with a very slight exertion of force.

But unfortunately one pair of my hinges got out of order, and refused
to perform its share of the propulsion. The result was that I became
lop-sided. I was therefore obliged to swim, which I now did with
considerable exertion; but another difficulty soon occurred,—the
instrument on the {207} disabled side refused to do its share in
propelling me. The tide was rapidly carrying me down the river; my
own exertions alone would have made me revolve in a small circle,
consequently I was obliged to swim in a spiral. It was very difficult
to calculate the curve I was describing upon the surface of the water,
and still more so to know at what point, if at any, I might hope to
reach its banks again. I became very much fatigued by my efforts, and
endeavoured to relieve myself for a time by resuming the vertical
position.

After floating, or rather struggling for some time, my feet at last
touched the bottom. With some difficulty and much exertion I now gained
the bank, on which I lay down in a state of great exhaustion.

This experiment satisfied me of the danger as well as of the
practicability of my plan, and ever after, when in the water, I
preferred trusting to my own unassisted powers.

〈DANGER IN THE THAMES TUNNEL.〉

At the close of the year 1827, as I anticipated a long absence from
England, I paid a visit to the Thames Tunnel, in the construction of
which I took a great interest. My eldest son, then about twelve years
of age, accompanied me in this visit. I fortunately found the younger
Brunel at the works, who kindly took us with him into the workings.

We stood upon a timber platform, distant about fifty feet from the
shield, which was full of busy workmen, each actively employed in his
own cell. As we were conversing together, I observed some commotion in
the upper cell on the right hand side. From its higher corner there
entered a considerable stream of liquid mud. Brunel ran directly to the
shield a line of workmen was instantly formed, and whatever tools or
timber was required was immediately conveyed to the spot.

〈ON THE PROPER TIME FOR RUNNING AWAY.〉

I observed the progress with some anxiety, since but a short time
before a similar occurrence had been the prelude {208} to the
inundation of the whole tunnel. I remained watching the fit time, if
necessary, to run away; but also noticing what effect the apparent
danger had on my son. After a short time it was clear that the ingress
of liquid mud had been checked, and in a few minutes more Brunel
returned to me, having this time succeeded in stopping up the breach. I
then inquired what was really the nature of the danger we had escaped.
Brunel told me that unless himself or Gravatt had been present, the
whole tunnel would in less than ten minutes have been full of water.
The next day I embarked for Holland, and in about a week after I read
in Galignani’s newspaper, that the Thames had again broken into the
tunnel; that five or six of the workmen had been drowned, and that
Brunel himself had escaped with great difficulty by swimming.

In 1818, during a visit to Plymouth, I had an opportunity of going
down in a diving-bell: I was accompanied by two friends and the usual
director of that machine.

The diving-bell in which I descended was a cast-iron vessel about six
feet long by four feet and a half wide, and five feet eight inches
high. In the top of the bell there were twelve circular apertures, each
about six inches in diameter, filled by thick plate-glass fixed by
water-tight cement. Exactly in the centre there were a number of small
holes through which the air was continually pumped in from above.

At the ends of the bell are two seats, placed at such a height, that
the top of the head is but a few inches below the top of the bell;
these will conveniently hold two persons each. Exactly in the middle
of the bell, and about six inches above its lower edge, is placed a
narrow board, on which the feet of the divers rest. On one side, nearly
on a level with the shoulders, is a small shelf, with a ledge to {209}
contain a few tools, chalk for writing messages, and a ring to which
a small rope is tied. A board is connected with this rope; and after
writing any orders on the board with a piece of chalk, on giving it a
pull, the superintendent above, round whose arm the other end of the
rope is fastened, will draw it up to the surface, and, if necessary,
return an answer by the same conveyance.

In order to enter the bell, it is raised about three or four feet
above the surface of the water; and the boat, in which the persons who
propose descending are seated, is brought immediately under it; the
bell is then lowered, so as to enable them to step upon the foot-board
within it; and having taken their seats, the boat is removed, and the
bell gradually descends to the water.

〈SENSATIONS IN A DIVING-BELL.〉

On touching the surface, and thus cutting off the communication
with the external air, a peculiar sensation is perceived in the
ears; it is not, however, painful. The attention is soon directed to
another object. The air rushing in through the valve at the top of
the bell overflows, and escapes with a considerable bubbling noise
under the sides. The motion of the bell proceeds slowly, and almost
imperceptibly; and, on looking at the glass lenses close to the head,
when the top of the machine just reaches the surface of the water, it
may be perceived, by means of the little impurities which float about
in it, flowing into the recesses containing the glasses. A pain now
begins to be felt in the ears, arising from the increased external
pressure; this may sometimes be removed by the act of yawning, or by
closing the nostrils and mouth, and attempting to force air through the
ears. As soon as the equilibrium is established the pain ceases, but
recommences almost immediately by the continuance of the descent. On
returning, the same sensation of {210} pain is felt in the ears; but
it now arises from the dense air which had filled them endeavouring, as
the pressure is removed, to force its way out.

〈OBSERVATION IN DIVING BELL.〉

If the water is clear, and not much disturbed, the light in the bell
is very considerable; and, even at the depth of twenty feet, was more
than is usual in many sitting-rooms. Within the distance of eight or
ten feet, the stones at the bottom began to be visible. The pain in the
ears still continues to occur at intervals, until the descent of the
bell terminates by its resting on the ground. The light is sufficient,
after passing through twenty feet of sea water, even for delicate
experiments; and a far less quantity is enough for the work which is
usually performed in those situations.

The temperatures of the hand and of the mouth, under the tongue, were
measured by a thermometer, but they did not seem to differ from those
which had been determined by the same instrument previous to the
descent; at least, the difference did not amount to one-sixth of a
degree of Fahrenheit’s scale. The pulse was more frequent.

A small magnetic needle did not appear to have entirely lost its
directive power, when placed on the footboard in the middle of the
bell; but its direction was not the same as that which it indicated
on shore. This was determined by directing, by means of signals,
the workmen above to move the bell in the direction of one of the
co-ordinates; a stick then being pressed against the bottom drew a line
parallel to that co-ordinate, its direction by compass was ascertained
in the bell, and the direction of the co-ordinate was determined on
returning to the surface after leaving the bell.

Signals are communicated by the workmen in the bell to those above,
by striking against the side of the bell with a hammer. Those most
frequently wanted are indicated by {211} the fewest number of blows;
thus a single stroke is to require more air. The sound is heard very
distinctly by those above; but, it must be confessed, that to persons
unaccustomed to it, the force with which a weighty hammer is driven
against so brittle a material as cast iron is a little alarming.

After ascending a few inches from the bottom, the air in the bell
became slightly obscured. At the distance of a few feet this appearance
increased. Before it had half reached the surface, it was evident that
the whole atmosphere it contained was filled with a mist or cloud,
which at last began to condense in large drops on the whole of the
internal surface.

The explanation of this phenomenon seems to be, that on the rising of
the bell the pressure on the air within being diminished by a weight
equal to several feet of water, it began to expand; and some portion
of it escaping under the edges of the bell, reduced the temperature
of that which remained so much, that it was unable to retain, in the
state of invisible vapour, the water which it had previously held in
solution. Thus the same principle which constantly produces clouds in
the atmosphere filled the diving-bell with mist.

〈SUBMARINE NAVIGATION.〉

This first led me to consider the much more extensive question of
submarine navigation. I was aware that Fulton had already descended
in a diving-vessel, and remained under water during several hours. He
also carried down a copper sphere containing one cubic foot of space
into which he had forced two hundred atmospheres. With these means he
remained under water and moved about at pleasure during four hours.

〈OPEN SUBMARINE VESSEL.〉

But a closed vessel is obviously of little use for the most important
purposes to which submarine navigation would be applied in case of war.
In the article Diving Bell, published in 1826, in the ‘Encyclopedia
Metropolitana,’ I gave a {212} description and drawings of an
_open_ submarine vessel which would contain sufficient air for the
consumption of four persons during more than two days. A few years ago,
I understand, experiments were made in the Seine at Paris, on a similar
kind of open diving-vessel. Such a vessel could be propelled by a
screw, and might enter, without being suspected, any harbour, and place
any amount of explosive matter under the bottoms of ships at anchor.

Such means of attack would render even iron and iron-clad ships unsafe
when blockading a port. For though chains were kept constantly passing
under their keels, it would yet be possible to moor explosive magazines
at some distance below, which would effectually destroy them.

{213}




CHAPTER XVI.

EXPERIENCE BY FIRE.


 Baked in an Oven — A Living Volcano — Vesuvius in action — Carried up
 the Cone of Ashes in a Chair — View of the Crater in a Dark Night —
 Sunrise — Descent by Ropes and Rolling into the great Crater — Watched
 the small Crater in active eruption at intervals — Measured a Base of
 330 feet — Depth of great Crater 570 feet — Descent into small Crater
 — A Lake of red-hot Boiling Lava — Regained the great Crater with
 the sacrifice of my Boots — Lunched on Biscuits and Irish Whisky —
 Visit to the Hot Springs of Ischia — Towns destroyed by Earthquake —
 Coronets of Smoke projected by Vesuvius — Artificial Mode of producing
 them — Fire-damp visited in Welsh Coal-mine in company with Professor
 Moll.


_Baked in an Oven._

Calling one morning upon Chantrey, I met Captain Kater and the late
Sir Thomas Lawrence, the President of the Royal Academy. Chantrey was
engaged at that period in casting a large bronze statue. An oven of
considerable size had been built for the purpose of drying the moulds.
I made several inquiries about it, and Chantrey kindly offered to let
me pay it a visit, and thus ascertain by my own feelings the effects of
high temperature on the human body.

I willingly accepted the proposal, and Captain Kater offered
to accompany me. Sir Thomas Lawrence, who was suffering from
indisposition, did not think it prudent to join our party. In fact, he
died on the second or third day after our experiment.

The iron folding-doors of the small room or oven were {214} opened.
Captain Kater and myself entered, and they were then closed upon
us. The further _corner_ of the room, which was paved with squared
stones, was visibly of a dull-red heat. The thermometer marked, if
I recollect rightly, 265°. The pulse was quickened, and I ought to
have counted but did not count the number of inspirations per minute.
Perspiration commenced immediately and was very copious. We remained,
I believe, about five or six minutes without very great discomfort,
and I experienced no subsequent inconvenience from the result of the
experiment.


_A Living Volcano._

I have never been so fortunate as to be _conscious_ of having
experienced the least shock of an earthquake, although, when a town had
been destroyed in Ischia I hastened on from Rome in the hope of getting
a slight shake. My passion was disappointed, so I consoled myself by a
flirtation with a volcano.

〈VESUVIUS—CORONETS OF SMOKE.〉

The situation of my apartments during my residence at Naples enabled me
constantly to see the cone of Vesuvius, and the continual projections
of matter from its crater. Amongst these were occasionally certain
globes of air, or of some gas, which, being shot upwards to a great
height above the cone, spread out into huge coronets of smoke, having a
singular motion amongst their particles.

A similar phenomenon sometimes occurs on a small scale during the
firing of heavy ordnance. I have frequently seen such at Plymouth and
elsewhere; but I was not satisfied about the cause of this phenomenon.
I was told that it occurred more frequently if the muzzle of the gun
were rubbed with grease; but this did not always succeed.

〈ARTIFICIAL IMITATION.〉

Soon after my return to London I made a kind of drum, by {215}
stretching wet parchment over a large tin funnel. On directing the
point of the funnel at a candle placed a few feet distant, and giving
a smart blow upon the parchment, it is observed that the candle is
immediately extinguished.

This arises from what is called an air shot. In fact, the air in the
tubular part is projected bodily forward, and so blows out the candle.
The statements about persons being killed by cannon balls passing close
to but not touching them, if true, are probably the results of air
shots.

Wishing to trace the motions of such air shots, I added two small tubes
towards the large end of the tin funnel, in order that I might fill it
with smoke, and thus trace more distinctly the progress of the ball of
air.

To my great delight the first blow produced a beautiful coronet of
smoke, exactly resembling, on a small scale, the explosions from cannon
or the still more attractive ones from Vesuvius.

If phosphoretted hydrogen or any other gas, which takes fire in air,
were thus projected upwards, a very singular kind of fire-work would be
produced.

It is possible in dark nights or in fogs that by such means signals
might be made to communicate news or to warn vessels of danger.

Vesuvius was then in a state of moderate activity. It had a huge cone
of ashes on its summit, surrounding an extensive crater of great depth.
In one corner of this was a smaller crater, quite on a diminutive
scale, which from time to time ejected red-hot fragments of lava
occasionally to the height of from a thousand to fifteen hundred feet
above the summit of the mountain.

I had taken apartments in the Chiaja, just opposite the volcano, in
order that I might watch it with a telescope. In fact, {216} as I lay
in my bed I had an excellent view of the mountain. My next step was to
consult with Salvatori, the most experienced of the guides, from whom I
had purchased a good many minerals, as to the possibility of getting a
peep down the volcano’s throat.

〈ASCENT TO CRATER BY NIGHT.〉

Salvatori undertook to report to me from time to time the state of the
mountain, round the base of which I made frequent excursions. After
about a fortnight, the explosions were more regular and uniform, and
Salvatori assured me that all the usual known indications led him to
think that it was a fit time for my expedition. As I wished to see as
much as possible, I made arrangements to economize my strength by using
horses or mules to carry me wherever they could go. Where they could
not carry me, as for instance, up the steep slope of the cone of ashes,
I employed men to convey me in a chair.

By these means, I saw in the afternoon and evening of one day a good
deal of the upper part of the mountain, then took a few hours’ repose
in a hut, and reached the summit of the cone long before sunrise.

It was still almost dark: we stood upon the irregular edge of a vast
gulf spread out below at the depth of about five hundred feet. The
plain at the bottom would have been invisible but for an irregular
network of bright-red cracks spread over the whole of its surface.
Now and then the silence was broken by a rush upwards of a flight of
red-hot scoria from the diminutive crater within the large one. These
missiles, however, although projected high above the summit of the
cone, never extended themselves much beyond the small cavity from which
they issued.

Those who have seen the blood-vessels of their own eye by the aid of
artificial light, will have seen on a small scale a {217} perfect
resemblance of the plain which at that time formed the bottom of the
great crater of Vesuvius.

〈SUNRISE FROM THE SUMMIT.〉

As the morning advanced the light increased, and some time before
sunrise we had completed the tour of the top of the great crater. Then
followed that glorious sight—the sun when seen rising from the top of
some lofty mountain.

I now began to speculate upon the means of getting a nearer view of the
little miniature volcano in action at one corner of the gulf beneath
us. We had brought ropes with us, and I had observed, in our tour round
the crater, every dike of congealed lava by which the massive cone was
split. These presented buttresses with frequent ledges or huge steps
by which I hoped, with the aid of ropes, to descend into the Tartarus
below.

Having consulted with our chief guide Salvatori, I found that he was
unwilling to accompany us, and proposed remaining with the other guides
on the upper edge of the crater. Upon the whole, I was not discontented
with the arrangement, because it left a responsible person to keep the
other guides in order, and also sufficient force to lift us up bodily
by the ropes if that should become necessary.

The abruptness of the rocky buttresses compelled us to use ropes, but
the attempt to traverse the steep inclines of light ashes and of fine
sand would have been more dangerous from the risk of being engulfed in
them.

〈DESCENT INTO THE CRATER.〉

Having well examined the several disadvantages of these rough-hewn
irregular Titanic stairs, I selected one which seemed the most
promising for facilitating our descent into the crater. I was
encumbered with one of Troughton’s heavy barometers, strapped to my
back, looking much like Cupid’s quiver, though probably rather heavier.
In my pocket I had an excellent box sextant, and in a rough kind of
basket {218} two or three thermometers, a measuring tape, and a glass
bottle enclosed in a leather case, commonly called a pocket-pistol,
accompanied by a few biscuits.

We began our descent by the aid of two ropes, each supported above
by two guides. I proceeded, trusting to my rope to step wherever I
could, and then cautiously holding on by the rope to spring down to the
next ledge. In this manner we descended until we arrived at the last
projecting ledge of the dike. Nothing then remained for us but to slide
down a steep and lengthened incline of fine sand. Fortunately, the sand
itself was not very deep, and was supported by some solid material
beneath it. I soon found that it was impossible to stand, so I sat down
upon this moving mass, which evidently intended to accompany us in our
journey. At first, to my great dismay, I was relieved from the care
of my barometer, of which the runaway sand immediately took charge.
I then found myself getting deeper and deeper in the sand, and still
accelerating my downward velocity.

Gravity had at last done its work and became powerless. I soon dug
myself out of my sandy couch, and rushed to my faithful barometer lying
at some distance from me with its head just unburied. Fortunately, it
was uninjured. My companion, with more skill or good fortune, or with
less incumbrances, had safely alighted on the burning plain we now
stood upon.

The area of this plain, for it was perfectly flat, was in shape
somewhat elliptical. The surface consisted of a black scoriacious rock,
reticulated with ditches from one to three feet wide, intersecting each
other in every direction. From some of these, fumes not of the most
agreeable odour were issuing. All those above two feet deep showed
that at that depth below us everything was of a dull-red heat. It was
{219} these ditches with red-hot bottoms which, in the darkness of
the night, had presented the singular spectacle I described as having
witnessed on the evening before.

〈MEASUREMENT OF A BASE.〉

At one extremity of this oval plain there was a small cone, from which
the eruptions before described appeared to issue.

My first step, after examining the few instruments I had brought with
me, was to select a spot upon which to measure a base for ascertaining
the depth of the crater from its upper edge.

Having decided upon my base line, I took with my sextant the angle of
elevation of the rim of the crater above a remarkable spot on a level
with my eye. Then fixing my walking-stick into a little crack in the
scoria, I proceeded to measure with a tape a base line of 340 feet.
Arrived at this point, I again took the angle of elevation of the same
part of the rim from the same remarkable spot on a level with the eye.
Then, by way of verification, I remeasured my base line and found it
only differed from the former measure by somewhat less than one foot.
But my walking-stick, which had not penetrated the crack more than a
few inches, was actually in flames.

Having noted down these facts, including the state of the thermometer
and barometer, in my pocket-book, I took first a survey and then a
tour about my fiery domain. I afterwards found, from the result of
this measurement, that our base line was 570 feet below one of the
lowest points of the edge of the crater. Having collected a few mineral
specimens, I applied myself to observe and register the eruptions of
the little embryo volcano at the further extremity of the elliptical
plain.

〈DESCENT INTO SMALL ACTIVE CRATER.〉

These periodical eruptions interested me very much. I proceeded to
observe and register them, and found they occurred {220} at tolerably
regular intervals. At first, I performed this operation at a respectful
distance and out of the reach of the projected red-hot scoria. But as I
acquired confidence in their general regularity, I approached from time
to time more nearly to the little cone of scoria produced by its own
eruptions.

I now perceived an opening in this little cone close to the
perpendicular rock of the interior of the great crater. I was very
anxious to see real fluid lava; so immediately after an eruption, I
rushed to the opening and thus got within the subsidiary crater. But
my curiosity was not gratified, for I observed, about forty or fifty
feet below me, a huge projecting rock, which being somewhat in advance,
effectively prevented me from seeing the lava lake, if any such
existed. I then retreated to a respectful distance from this infant
volcano to wait for the next explosion.

I continued to note the intervals of time between these jets of red-hot
matter, and found that from ten to fifteen minutes was the range of
the intervals of repose. Having once more reconnoitred the descent
into the little volcano, I seized the opportunity of the termination
of one of the most considerable of its eruptions to run towards the
gap and cautiously to pick my way down to the rock which hid from me,
as I supposed, the liquid lava. I was armed with two phials, one of
common smelling salts, and the other containing a solution of ammonia.
On reaching the rock, I found it projected over a lake which was
really filled by liquid fiery lava. I immediately laid myself down,
and looking over its edge, saw, with great delight, lava actually in a
state of fusion.

〈WAVES IN LAKE OF FLUID LAVA.〉

Presently I observed a small bubble swelling up on the surface of the
fluid lava: it became gradually larger and larger, but did not burst. I
had some vague suspicion that {221} this indicated a coming eruption;
but on looking at my watch, I was assured that only one minute had
elapsed since the termination of the last. I therefore watched its
progress; after a time the bubble slowly subsided without breaking.

I now found the heat of the rock on which I was reposing, and the
radiation from the fluid lava, almost insupportable, whilst the
sulphurous effluvium painfully affected my lungs. On looking around, I
fortunately observed a spot a few feet above me, from which I could,
in a standing position, get a better view of the lake, and perhaps
suffer less inconvenience from its vapours. Having reached this spot,
I continued to observe the slow formation and absorption of these
vesicles of lava. One of them soon appeared. Another soon followed
at a different part of the fiery lake, but, like its predecessor, it
disappeared as quietly.

Another swelling now arose about half way distant from the centre of
the cauldron, which enlarged much beyond its predecessors in point of
size. It attained a diameter of about three feet, and then burst, but
not with any explosion. The waves it propagated in the fiery fluid
passed on to the sides, and were thence reflected back just as would
have happened in a lake of water of the same dimensions.

This phenomenon reappeared several times, some of the bubbles being
considerably larger in size, and making proportionally greater
disturbance in the liquid of this miniature crater. I would gladly have
remained a longer time, but the excessive heat, the noxious vapours,
and the warning of my chronometer forbade it. I climbed back through
the gap by which I had descended, and rushed as fast as I could to a
safe distance from the coming eruption.

I was much exhausted by the heat, although I suffered still greater
inconvenience from the vapours. From my {222} observations of the
eruptions before my descent into this little crater, I had estimated
that I might safely allow myself six minutes, but not more than eight,
if I descended into the crater immediately after an eruption.

If my memory does not fail me, I passed about six minutes in examining
it, and the next explosion occurred ten minutes after the former one.
On my return to Naples I found that a pair of thick boots I had worn on
this expedition were entirely destroyed by the heat, and fell to pieces
in my attempt to take them off.

〈BISCUITS AND WHISKY.〉

On my return from the pit of burning fire, I sat down with my companion
to refresh myself with a few biscuits contained in our basket. Cold
water would have been the most refreshing fluid we could have desired,
but we had none, and my impatient friend cried out, “I wish I had a
glass of whisky!” It immediately occurred to me to feel in my own
basket for a certain glass bottle preserved in a tight leather case,
which fortunately being found, I presented to my astonished friend,
with the remark that it contained half a pint of the finest Irish
whisky. This piece of good luck for my fellow-traveller arose not from
my love but from my dislike of whisky. Shortly before my Italian tour
I had been travelling in the north of Ireland, and having exhausted my
brandy, was unable to replace it by anything but whisky, a drink which
I can only tolerate under very exceptional circumstances.


_Hot Springs._

During my residence at Naples in 1828, the government appointed a
commission of members of the Royal Academy of Naples to visit Ischia
and make a report upon the hot springs in that island. Being a foreign
member of the Academy, they {223} did me the honour of placing my name
upon that commission. The weather was very favourable, the party was
most agreeable, and during three or four days I enjoyed the society
of my colleagues, the delightful scenery, and the highly interesting
natural phenomena of that singular island.

〈HOT SPRINGS OF ISCHIA.〉

None of the hot springs were deep: in several we made excavations
which, in all cases, gave increased heat to the water. In one or two,
I believe if we had excavated to a small depth or bored a few feet, we
might have met with boiling water.

I took the opportunity of this visit to view the devastations made by
the recent earthquake in the small town which had been destroyed.

The greater part of the town consisted of narrow streets formed by
small houses built of squared stone. In some of these streets the
houses on one side were thrown down, whilst those a few feet distant,
on the opposite side, although severely damaged, had their walls left
standing.

The landlord of the hotel at which we took up our quarters assured me
the effects of the recent earthquake were entirely confined to a small
portion of the island which he pointed out from the front of his hotel,
and added that it was scarcely felt in other parts.


_Earthquakes._

At the commencement of this chapter I mentioned that I had never been
_consciously_ sensible of the occurrence of an earthquake. I think
it may perhaps be useful to state that on a recent occasion I really
perceived the effects of an earthquake, although at the time I assigned
them to a different cause.

〈UNCONSCIOUS WITNESS OF EARTHQUAKE.〉

On the 6th of last October, about half-past three, a.m., {224} most of
the inhabitants of London who were awake at that hour perceived several
shocks of an earthquake. I also was awake, although not conscious of
the shocks of an earthquake.

As soon as I read of the event in the morning papers, I was forcibly
struck by its coincidence with my own observations, although I had
attributed to them an entirely different cause. In order to explain
this, it is necessary to premise that I had on a former occasion
instituted some experiments for the purpose of ascertaining how far
off the passing of a cart or carriage would affect the steadiness of
a star observed by reflection. Amongst other methods, I had fixed a
looking-glass of about 12 by 16 inches, by a pair of hinges, to the
front wall of my bedroom. It was usually so placed that, as I lay in
bed, at the distance of about 10 or 12 feet, I could see by reflection
a small gas-light burner, which was placed on my left hand.

By this arrangement any tremors propagated through the earth from
passing carriages would be communicated to the looking-glass by
means of the front wall of the house, which rose about 40 feet from
the surface. The image of the small gas-burner reflected in the
looking-glass would be proportionally disturbed. In this state of
things, at about half-past three o’clock of the morning in question,
I observed the reflected image of the gas-light move downwards and
upwards two or three times. I then listened attentively, expecting to
hear the sound of a distant carriage or cart. Hearing nothing of the
kind, I concluded that the earth wave had travelled beyond the limit of
the sound wave, arising from the carriage which produced it. Presently
the image of the gaslight again vibrated up and down, and then
suddenly fell about four or five inches lower down in the glass, where
it remained fixed for a time. Still thinking the observation of no
consequence, {225} I shut my eyes, and after perhaps another minute,
again saw the image in its lower position. It then rose to its former
position, vibrated, and shortly again descended: it remained down for
some time and then resumed its first position.


_Fire Damp._

An opportunity presented itself several years after my examination
of Vesuvius of witnessing another form under which fire occasionally
exerts its formidable power.

I was visiting a friend[37] at Merthyr Tydfil, who possessed very
extensive coal-mines. I inquired of my host whether any fire-damp
existed in them. On receiving an affirmative answer, I expressed a wish
to become personally acquainted with the miner’s invisible but most
dangerous enemy. Arrangements were therefore made for my visit to the
subterranean world on the following day. Professor Moll of Utrecht, who
was also a guest, expressed a wish to accompany me.

     [37] The late Sir John J. Guest, Bart.

The entrance to the mine is situated in the side of a mountain. Its
chief manager conducted our expedition to visit the ‘fire-king.’

We found a coal-waggon drawn by a horse, and filled with clean straw,
standing on the railway which led into the workings.

The manager, Professor Moll, and myself, together with two or three
assistants, with candles, lanterns, and Davy-lamps, got into this
vehicle, which immediately entered the adit of the mine. We advanced at
a good pace, passing at intervals doors which opened on our approach
and then instantly closed. Each door had an attendant boy, whose duty
was confined to the regulation of his own door. {226}

Many were the doors we passed before we arrived at the termination of
the tram-road. After travelling about a mile and a half, our carriage
stopped and we alighted. We now proceeded on foot, each carrying
his own candle, until we reached a kind of chamber where one of our
attendants was left with the candles.

〈DRIVE INTO THE MOUNTAIN.〉

We, each holding a Davy-lamp in our hand, advanced towards a small
opening in the side of this chamber, which was so low that we were
compelled to crawl, one after another, on our hands and knees. A
powerful current of air rushed through this small passage. On reaching
the end of it, we found ourselves in a much larger chamber from which
the coal had been excavated. At a little distance opposite to the path
by which we entered was a continuation of the same narrow hole which
had led us to the waste in which we now stood. From this opening issued
the powerful stream of air which seemed to pass in a direct course from
one opening to the other.

On our right hand the large chamber we had entered appeared to spread
to a very considerable distance, its termination being lost in
darkness. The floor was covered with fragments which had fallen from
the roof; so that, besides the risk from explosion, there was also a
minor one arising from the possible fall of some huge mass of slate
from the roof of the excavation beneath which we stood: an accident
which I had already witnessed in the waste of another coal-mine. As we
advanced over this flaky flooring it was evident that we were making
a considerable ascent. We, in fact, now occupied a vast cavern, which
had been originally formed by the extraction of the coal, and then
partially filled up by the falling in from time to time of portions of
the slaty roof.

〈TEMPLE OF THE FIRE-KING.〉

As we advanced cautiously with our Davy-lamps beyond {227} the current
of air which had hitherto accompanied us, it was evident that a change
had taken place in their light: for the flames became much enlarged.
Professor Moll and myself mounted a huge heap of these fragments,
and thus came into contact with air highly charged with carburetted
hydrogen. At this point there was a very sensible difference in the
atmosphere, even by a change of three feet in the elevation of the lamp.

Holding up the lamp at the level of my head, I could not see the
wick of the lamp, but a general flame seemed to fill the inside of
its wire-covering. On lowering it to the height of my knee, the wick
resumed its large nebulous appearance.

My companion, Professor Moll, was very much delighted with this
experiment. He told me he had often at his lectures explained these
effects to his pupils, but that this was the first exhibition of them
he had ever witnessed in their natural home.

Although well acquainted with the miniature explosions of the
experimentalist, I found it very difficult to realize in my own
mind the effects which might result from an explosion under the
circumstances in which we were then placed. I inquired of the manager,
who stood by my side, what would probably be the effect, if an
explosion were to take place? Pointing to the vast heap of shale from
which I had just descended, he said the whole of that would be blown
through the narrow channel by which we entered, and every door we had
passed through would be blown down.

We now retraced our steps, and crawling back through the narrow
passage, rejoined our carriage, and were rapidly conveyed to the light
of day.

{228}




CHAPTER XVII.

EXPERIENCE AMONGST WORKMEN.


 Visit to Bradford — Clubs — Co-operative Shops — The Author of the
 “Economy of Manufactures” welcomed by the Workmen — Visit to the
 Temple of Eolus — The Philosopher moralises — Commiserates the
 unsuccessful Statesman — Points to the Poet a Theme for his Verse —
 Immortalises both.

During one of my visits to Leeds, combinations and trades-unions were
very prevalent. A medical friend of mine, who was going to Bradford
on a professional visit, very kindly offered to take me over in his
carriage and bring me back again in the evening. He had in that town a
friend engaged in the manufactories of the place, to whom he proposed
to introduce me, and who would willingly give me every assistance.
Unfortunately, on our arrival we found that this gentleman was absent
on a tour.

My medical friend was much vexed; but I assured him that I was never at
a loss in a manufacturing town, and we agreed to meet at our hotel for
dinner. I then went into the town to pick up what information I might
be able to meet with.

〈INTELLIGENT OPERATIVE.〉

Passing a small manufactory, I think it was of door-mats, I inquired
whether a stranger might be permitted to see it. The answer being in
the affirmative, one of the men accompanied me round the works. Of
course I asked him many questions which he answered as far as he could;
but several of them {229} puzzled him, and he very good-humouredly
tried to supply the information I wanted by asking several of his
fellow-workmen. One question about which I was anxious to be informed,
puzzled them all. At last one of the men to whom he applied said, “Why
don’t you go and ask Sam Brown?” My guide immediately went in search of
his learned friend, who gave me full information on the subjects of my
inquiry.

Much pleased by the intelligence and acuteness of this man, I thought
it possible he might have read the “Economy of Manufactures.” On
mentioning that work, I found he was well acquainted with it, and he
asked my opinion of its merits. I told him that, having myself written
the book, I was not an impartial judge. On hearing that I was its
author, his delight was unbounded; he held out his brawny hand, which I
cordially grasped. The most gratifying remark to me, however, amongst
the many things in it to which he referred with approbation, was the
expression he applied to it as a whole. “Sir,” said my new friend,
“that book made me think.” To make a man think for himself is doing him
far higher service than giving him much instruction.

I now told my new friend that I had studied a little the effects
of combinations, and also the results of co-operative shops, and
that I was very anxious to add to my stock of information upon both
subjects, but particularly on the latter. Knowing that there existed
a co-operative shop in Bradford, I asked whether it would be possible
to see it and make some inquiries as to its state and prospects. He
said if he could get permission for half an hour’s absence he would
accompany me to it, and give me whatever information I wished as to its
operation.

〈CO-OPERATIVE SHOPS.〉

Mr. Brown accordingly accompanied me to the {230} co-operative shop,
where the information required was most readily given.

As we were returning, my companion exclaimed, “Oh, how lucky! there is
——, the secretary of all our clubs. He is the man to tell you all about
them.” We accordingly crossed over to the other side: the secretary,
as soon as he heard my name, held out his hand and greeted me with a
hearty grasp.

Having told him the objects of my inquiry, he expressed great anxiety
to give me the fullest information. He proposed to take me with him
in the course of the evening to all the clubs in Bradford, in each of
which he promised me that I should receive a most cordial welcome.

He offered to show me all their rules, with the exception of certain
ones which he assured me had no connection whatever with the objects of
my inquiries, and which the laws of the respective clubs required to
be kept secret. I think it right to mention this fact; but I am bound
also to add that I have a strong conviction of the truth and sincerity
of my informant. I believe that the one or two rules which I understood
could not be communicated to a stranger, were merely secret modes of
recognition amongst the members of the different societies by which
fellow-members of the same societies might recognize each other in
distant places.

However, my limited time was now drawing to a close. It was impossible
to remain at Bradford that night, and my previous arrangements called
me in two days to a distant part of the country. I parted with regret
from these friendly workmen, and joining my companion at the hotel,
after a hasty dinner we were soon on our way back to Leeds.

Our conversation turned upon the large ironworks we should pass on our
return, which indeed were clearly {231} indicated by the columns of
fire in front of us—tall chimneys illumining the darkness of the night.

I was told by my friend that in one of the ironworks which we should
pass, there was a large tunnel through a rock which had originally been
intended for a canal: but that it was now used as an air-chamber, to
equalize the supply of the blast furnaces. Also that an engine of a
hundred horse-power continually blew air into this stony chamber.

I inquired whether it would be possible to get admission into this
Temple of Æolus. As my friend, fortunately for me, was acquainted with
the proprietors, this was not difficult. Our carriage drove up to the
manager’s house, and my wish was immediately gratified.

〈A REVERIE.〉

A lantern was provided, a small iron door at the end of the cavern
was opened, and armed like Diogenes, I entered upon _my_ search after
truth. I soon ascertained that there was very little current, except
close to the tuyeres which supplied the several furnaces, and also at
the aperture through which tons of air were driven without cessation by
the untiring fiery horse.

I tried to think seriously; and reflecting on Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abed-nego, I speculated whether their furnace might have been hotter
than the one before me. I was within a foot or two of a white heat, but
I had no thermometer with me, and if I had had one, its graduations
might not have been upon the same scale as theirs—so I gave up the
speculation.

The intensity of that fire was peculiarly impressive. It recalled
the past, disturbed the present, and suggested the future. The
contemplation of the fiery abyss, which had recalled the history
of those ancient Hebrews, naturally turned my attention to the
wonderful powers of endurance {232} manifested by one of their modern
representatives. Candour obliges me to admit that my speculations on
the future were not entirely devoid of anxiety, though I trust they
were orthodox, for whilst I admired the humanity of Origen, I was
shocked by the heresy of Maurice.

I now began to moralize.

〈EFFECT OF A DRAFT ON CONTEMPLATION.〉

Blown upon by a hundred horse-power, I sympathised with Disraeli
refrigerated by his _friends_. Turning from that painful contemplation,
I was calmed by the freshness of the breeze. The action of the pumps,
the _cool_ness of the place and of the time, for it was _evening_,
recalled to my recollection M....... M.....; so I hoped, for the sake
of instruction, that he would in his own adamantine verses snatch
if possible from oblivion the moral anatomy of that unsuccessful
statesman. Yet, lest even the poet himself should be forgotten, I
resolved to give each of them his last chance of celebrity preserved in
the modest amber of my own simple prose.

Emerging from my reverie, I made the preconcerted signal; the iron door
was opened, and we were again on our road to Leeds.

{233}




CHAPTER XVIII.

PICKING LOCKS AND DECIPHERING.


 Interview with Vidocq — Remarkable Power of altering his Height — A
 Bungler in picking Locks — Mr. Hobbs’s Lock and the Duke of Wellington
 — Strong belief that certain Ciphers are inscrutable — Davies
 Gilbert’s Cipher — The Author’s Cipher both deciphered — Classified
 Dictionaries of the English Language — Anagrams — Squaring Words —
 Bishop not easily squared — Lesser Dignitaries easier to work upon.

These two subjects are in truth much more nearly allied than might
appear upon a superficial view of them. They are in fact closely
connected with each other as small branches of the same vast subject of
_combinations_.

Several years ago, the celebrated thief-taker, Vidocq, paid a short
visit to London. I had an interview of some duration with this
celebrity, who obligingly conveyed to me much information, which,
though highly interesting, was not of a nature to become personally
useful to me.

He possessed a very remarkable power, which he was so good as to
exhibit to me. It consisted in altering his height to about an inch and
a half less than his ordinary height. He threw over his shoulders a
cloak, in which he walked round the room. It did not touch the floor in
any part, and was, I should say, about an inch and a half above it. He
then altered his height and took the same walk. The cloak then touched
the floor and lay upon it in some part or other during the whole {234}
walk. He then stood still and altered his height alternately, several
times to about the same amount.

I inquired whether the altered height, if sustained for several hours,
produced fatigue. He replied that it did not, and that he had often
used it during a whole day without any additional fatigue. He remarked
that he had found this gift very useful as a disguise. I asked whether
any medical man had examined the question; but it did not appear that
any satisfactory explanation had been arrived at.

〈PICKING LOCKS, VIDOCQ, HOBBS.〉

I now entered upon a favourite subject of my own—the art of picking
locks—but, to my great disappointment, I found him not at all strong
upon that question. I had myself bestowed some attention upon it,
and had written a paper, ‘On the Art of Opening all Locks,’ at the
conclusion of which I had proposed a plan of partially defeating my own
method. My paper on that subject is not yet published.

Several years after Vidocq’s appearance in London, the Exhibition of
1851 occurred. On one of my earliest visits, I observed a very curious
lock of large dimensions with its internal mechanism fully exposed to
view. I found, on inquiry, that it belonged to the American department.
Having discovered the exhibitor, I asked for an explanation of the
lock. I listened with great interest to a very profound disquisition
upon locks and the means of picking them, conveyed to me with the most
unaffected simplicity.

I felt that the maker of that lock surpassed me in knowledge of the
subject almost as much as I had thought I excelled Vidocq. Having
mentioned it to the late Duke of Wellington, he proposed that we
should pay a visit to the lock the next time I accompanied him to the
Exhibition. We did so a few days after, when the Duke was equally
pleased with the lock and its inventor. Mr. Hobbs, the {235} gentleman
of whom I am speaking, and whose locks have now become so celebrated,
was good enough to explain to me from time to time many difficult
questions in the science of constructing and of picking locks. He
informed me that he had devised a system for defeating all these
methods of picking locks, for which he proposed taking out a patent.
I was, however, much gratified when I found that it was precisely the
plan I had previously described in my own unpublished pamphlet.


_Deciphering._

Deciphering is, in my opinion, one of the most fascinating of arts, and
I fear I have wasted upon it more time than it deserves. I practised
it in its simplest form when I was at school. The bigger boys made
ciphers, but if I got hold of a few words, I usually found out the key.
The consequence of this ingenuity was occasionally painful: the owners
of the detected ciphers sometimes thrashed me, though the fault really
lay in their own stupidity.

There is a kind of maxim amongst the craft of decipherers (similar to
one amongst the locksmiths), that every cipher can be deciphered.

〈BELIEF IN AN INSCRUTABLE CIPHER.〉

I am myself inclined to think that deciphering is an affair of time,
ingenuity, and patience; and that very few ciphers are worth the
trouble of unravelling them.

One of the most singular characteristics of the art of deciphering
is the strong conviction possessed by every person, even moderately
acquainted with it, that he is able to construct a cipher which nobody
else can decipher. I have also observed that the cleverer the person,
the more intimate is his conviction. In my earliest study of the
subject I shared in this belief, and maintained it for many years.
{236}

〈THE PRESIDENT OF ROYAL SOCIETY’S CIPHER DECIPHERED.〉

In a conversation on that subject which I had with the late Mr. Davies
Gilbert, President of the Royal Society, each maintained that he
possessed a cipher which was absolutely inscrutable. On comparison,
it appeared that we had both imagined the same law, and we were thus
confirmed in our conviction of the security of our cipher.

Many years after, the late Dr. Fitton, having asked my opinion of
the possibility of making an inscrutable cipher, I mentioned the
conversation I had had with Davies Gilbert, and explained the law of
the cipher, which we both thought would baffle the greatest adept
in that science. Dr. Fitton fully agreed in my view of the subject;
but even whilst I was explaining the law, an indistinct glimpse of
defeating it presented itself vaguely to my imagination. Having
mentioned my newly-conceived doubt, it was entirely rejected by my
friend. I then proposed that Dr. Fitton should write a few sentences in
a cipher constructed according to this law, and that I should make some
attempts to unravel it. I offered to give a few hours to the subject;
and if I could see my way to a solution, to continue my researches; but
if not on the road to success, to tell him I had given up the task.

Late in the evening of that day I commenced a preparatory inquiry into
the means of unravelling this new cipher, and I soon arrived at a
tolerable certainty that I should succeed. The next night, on my return
from a party, I found Dr. Fitton’s cipher on my table. I immediately
commenced my attempt. After some time I found that it would not yield
to my means of treating it; and on further examination I succeeded in
proving that it was not written according to the law agreed upon. At
first my friend was very positive that I was mistaken; and having taken
it to his sister, by whose {237} aid it was composed, he returned and
told me that it _was_ constructed upon the very law I had proposed. I
then assured him that they _must_ have made some mistake, and that my
evidence was so irresistible, that if my life depended upon the result
I should have no hesitation in making my election.

Dr. Fitton again retired to consult his sister; and after the lapse of
a considerable interval of time again returned, and informed me that I
was right—that his sister had inadvertently mistaken the enunciation
of the law. I now remarked that I possessed an absolute demonstration
of the fact I had communicated to him; and added that, having
conjectured the origin of the mistake, I would decipher the cipher with
the erroneous law before he could send me the new cipher to be made
according to the law originally proposed. Before the evening of the
next day both ciphers had been translated.

This cipher was arranged upon the following principle:—Two concentric
circles of cardboard were formed, each divided into twenty-six or more
divisions.

On the outer were written in regular order the letters of the alphabet.
On the inner circle were written the same twenty-six letters, but in
any irregular manner.

In order to use this cipher, look for the first letter of the word to
be ciphered on the outside circle. Opposite to it, on the inner circle,
will be another letter, which is to be written as the cipher for the
former.

Now turn round the inner circle until the cipher just written is
opposite the letter _a_ on the _outer_ circle. Proceed in the same
manner for the next, and so on for all succeeding letters.

Many varieties of this cipher may be made by inserting {238} other
characters to represent the divisions between words, the various stops,
or even blanks. Although Davies Gilbert, I believe, and myself, both
arrived at it from our own efforts, I have reason to think that it is
of very much older date. I am not sure that it may not be found in the
“Steganographia” of Schott, or even of Trithemius.

〈NEW DICTIONARY OF ENGLISH LANGUAGE.〉

One great aid in deciphering is, a complete analysis of the language
in which the cipher is written. For this purpose I took a good English
dictionary, and had it copied out into a series of twenty-four other
dictionaries. They comprised all words of

 One letter,
 Two letters,
 Three letters,
    &c. &c.:
 Twenty-six letters.

Each dictionary was then carefully examined, and all the modifications
of each word, as, for instance, the plurals of substantives, the
comparatives and superlatives of adjectives, the tenses and participles
of verbs, &c., were carefully indicated. A second edition of these
twenty-six dictionaries was then made, including these new derivatives.

Each of these dictionaries was then examined, and every word which
contained any two or more letters of the same kind was carefully
marked. Thus, against the word _tell_ the numbers 3 and 4 were placed
to indicate that the third and fourth letters are identical. Similarly,
the word _better_ was followed by the numbers 25, 34. Each of these
dictionaries was then re-arranged thus:—In the first or original one
each word was arranged according to the alphabetical order of its
_initial_ letter.

In the next the words were arranged alphabetically {239} according to
the _second_ letter of each word, and so in the other dictionaries on
to the last letter.

Again, each dictionary was divided into several others, according to
the numerical characteristics placed at the end of each word. Many
words appeared repeatedly in several of these subdivisions.

The work is yet unfinished, although the classification already
amounts, I believe, to nearly half a million words.

〈QUEER COINCIDENCES.〉

From some of these, dictionaries were made of those words only which
by transposition of their letters formed anagrams. A few of these are
curious:—

 Opposite.   Similarity.   Satirical.

 vote veto    fuel flue    odes dose
 acre care    taps pats    bard drab
 evil veil    tubs buts    poem mope
 ever veer    vast vats    poet tope
 lips slip    note tone    trio riot
 cask sack    cold clod    star rats
 fowl wolf    evil vile    wive view
 gods dogs    arms mars    nabs bans
 tory tyro    rove over    tame mate
 tars rats    lips lisp    acts cats

There are some verbal puzzles costing much time to solve which may be
readily detected by these dictionaries. Such, for instance, is the
sentence,

 I tore ten Persian MSS.,

which it is required to form into one word of eighteen letters.

The first process is to put opposite each letter the number of times it
occurs, thus:— {240}

 i   2
 t   2
 o   1
 r   2
 e   3
 n   2
 p   1
 s   3
 a   1
 m   1
    ──
    18

It contains—
  2 triplets.
  4 pairs.
  4 single letters.
 ──
 18

Now, on examining the dictionary of all words of eighteen letters, it
will be observed that they amount to twenty-seven, and that they may be
arranged in six classes:—

 7 having five letters of the same kind.
 5 having four letters of the same kind.
 3 having three triplets.
 7 having two triplets.
 3 having one triplet.
 2 having seven pairs.
 ──
 27

〈ANAGRAMS.〉

Hence it appears that the word sought must be one of those seven having
two triplets, and also that it must have four pairs; this reduces the
question to the two words—

 misinterpretations, misrepresentations.

The latter is the one sought, because its triplets are e and s, whilst
those of the former are i and t.

The reader who has leisure may try to find out the word of eighteen
letters formed by the following sentence:—

 Art is not in, but Satan.

〈SQUARING A DEAN.〉

Another amusing puzzle may be greatly assisted by these {241}
dictionaries. It is called squaring words, and is thus practised:—Let
the given word to be squared be Dean. It is to be written horizontally,
and also vertically, thus:—

 D e a n.
 e . . .
 a . . .
 n . . .

And it is required to fill up the blanks with such letters that each
vertical column shall be the same as its corresponding horizontal
column, thus:—

 D e a n
 e a s e
 a s k s
 n e s t

The various ranks of the church are easily squared; but it is stated, I
know not on what authority, that no one has yet succeeded in squaring
the word bishop.

Having obtained one squared word, as in the case of Dean, it will be
observed that any of the letters in the two diagonals, d, a, k, t,—n,
s, s, n, may be changed into any other letter which will make an
English word.

Thus Dean may be changed into such words as

 dear   peas   weak   beam
 fear   seas   lead   seal
 deaf   bear   real   team

In fact there are upwards of sixty substitutes: possibly some of these
might render the two diagonals, d, a, k, t, and n, s, s, n, also
English words.

{242}




CHAPTER XIX.

EXPERIENCE IN ST. GILES’S.


 Deep-snow — Beggar in Belgravia wanted work — He said he was a
 Watchmaker — Gave his address — It was false — Met him months after —
 The same story — The same untruth — Children hired for the purpose of
 Begging — Cellar in St. Giles’s — Inquired for a Poor Woman and Child
 — Landlady told me of a Man almost starving in her back kitchen — He
 turned out to be an accomplished Swindler — Pot-boys — Caught him at
 last — Took him to Bow Street.

Soon after taking up my residence in London, I met with many
applications from street-beggars, with various tales of distress. I
could not imagine that all these were fictitious, and found great
difficulty in selecting the few objects on whom I could bestow my very
moderate means of charity. One severe winter I resolved on making my
own personal observations on the most promising cases which presented
themselves.

The first general principle at which I arrived was, that—

In whatever part of London I might be, if I asked for the residence of
a mendicant, it was pretty sure to be in a quarter very remote from the
one in which he asked relief.

The next was, that—

Those mendicants who professed to want work and not charity, always
belonged to trades in which it was scarcely possible to give them
employment without trusting them with valuable property. {243}

One example will suffice. During a very severe winter, the ground
being covered with snow, whilst passing through Belgrave Square, a man
accosted me, declaring that he could get no work, and that himself and
family were starving.

〈BEGGAR, A WATCHMAKER.〉

I inquired his trade: he was a watchmaker. I asked for his address.
I wrote down in my pocket-book his name, the street, and the number,
and read it to him: it was in Clerkenwell. The next day I went there,
made particular inquiries of the landlord, and was informed that no
person of that name lodged in the house, or ever had lodged in it. I
spoke to several respectable female lodgers also, who gave me the same
information, as far as their knowledge went.

Several months after, I met the same professional mendicant in Portland
Road. He did not recollect me, and again told the same story, and again
gave me the same address. On this, I recalled to his memory that I
had seen him before: that he had given me the same address; and that,
having myself been there to inquire, I had found that his story was
untrue. This statement had allowed him time to invent a new tale.

With well-feigned surprise he suddenly remembered that his wife, about
three months ago, had told him that a strange gentleman had called, and
had particularly inquired for him; that his wife, knowing that a writ
was out against him, and that he was liable to be arrested, had denied
that any person of his name resided in the house.

A few days after I went again to Clerkenwell, and received from the
residents the answer they had given me three months before. I then
went to one of the large shops for tools used by watchmakers near that
locality, and having mentioned the subject to the master, he very
readily asked amongst his shopmen whether they knew of such a person.
{244}

He assured me that, even allowing the man had not usually dealt at his
shop, it was impossible that he should not have been several times
there for some trifling article necessary in the hurry of his business.
I then went to two or three other shops of a similar kind, and found
that his name was entirely unknown. I therefore concluded that he was
an impostor.

I will mention one other case, because it arose entirely out of an
accident, and could not have been foreseen.

Living at that time much in society, I usually walked home from the
hot rooms of an evening party wrapped in a stout cloak, even though
it sometimes rained. On these occasions I was often placed in a most
painful situation.

〈BEGGARS WITH CHILDREN.〉

A half-clad miserable female, with an infant in her arms, and sometimes
accompanied by another just able to walk, followed me through a
drizzling rain to ask charity for her starving children.

I confess it was to me a most painful effort to resist such an
application; yet my better reason informed me that in all probability
these miserable children were hired for the purpose of exciting the
feelings of the charitable. To give money to their heartless conductors
could only be considered charitable, inasmuch as it might contribute to
shorten the lives of their wretched victims.

I fear I gave wrongfully many a sixpence. I inquired into some cases,
but without any result which could enable me to alter the opinion I
have expressed. It was in one of these inquiries that the singular case
I am now about to relate occurred.

In one of the densest of London fogs on a November night, or rather at
between one and two o’clock in the morning, I was inquiring, in one of
the most disreputable streets in London—George Street, St. Giles’s,
long ago pulled down, {245} enlarged, and rebuilt—for a female with an
infant, who had represented herself to me as a miserable mother, and
into the truth of whose story I was anxious to inquire.

I had been into several of the lowest lodging-houses, and into the
cellars of that nest of misery and guilt, and was unsuccessful in
finding the object I sought.

〈THE LANDLADY IN GEORGE STREET, ST. GILES’S.〉

Only a few of these abodes of wretchedness remained unvisited, when
I inquired after the poor woman I was seeking of a somewhat decently
clothed woman, who rented one of them.

She was the weekly tenant of one of these houses, and told me that
on the preceding night a poor woman, with a child wrapped up in a
miserably torn shawl, had applied for a lodging at about eleven
o’clock. It was raining hard, and the poor woman possessed only
twopence, and the price of a bed in the cellar was at this house
threepence. The poor woman went away, remarking that she must then go
and pawn the remnant of the shawl that covered her infant. She went,
but returned no more.

The ancient weekly tenant then thought it necessary to defend, or
rather to explain, her own apparently cruel conduct. I told her that
it was unnecessary, and that even in my inmost thoughts I had not cast
a reproach upon her. I told her that, from my knowledge of the misery
suffered by poor people, I could readily imagine circumstances which
might fully explain her conduct.

Her heart, however, was too full, so I sat down and listened to her
tale. She was a widow advanced in years, having no relatives, or even
friends, to assist her in her old age. She was the weekly tenant of a
small house in that villanous street, and was entirely supported by
letting out every foot of floor which could be made available for a
human being to {246} sleep upon. But the stern necessity which hung
over her with its iron hand was this:—

Her weekly rent became due on each Monday, and if not paid on that
night, the next morning would see her inexorably turned out of her only
home, and deprived of her only means of sustaining life.

〈A STARVING MAN IN HER KITCHEN.〉

She was pleased at my attention to her sad tale, and, with a little
encouragement, mentioned some of the experience she had had in her
painful vocation.

“At this moment,” she said, “there is lying on a rug in the back
kitchen a young man, who has tasted nothing during the last two
days but water from the pump on the opposite side of the street. He
appears,” she said, “to have been in better circumstances in other
times.”

It was now two o’clock in the morning, in the midst of a dense fog. I
inquired whether it would be possible at this hour to get some soup
or meat, or anything to sustain life. I went down into the close
unventilated room, and beheld, stretched on a kind of thing like a
couple of sacks, a pale, emaciated man, apparently about two or three
and thirty years of age. I desired him to call on me the next morning;
and, leaving my address with his landlady, left also a small sum of
money to procure for him, if possible, present necessaries.

The next morning this half-starved man called at my house, in garments
scarcely covering him. I inquired into his history, and he told me
one probably as fabulous as that with which he afterwards deluded me,
during my own short acquaintance with him.

I supplied him with a few clothes, shoes, and other things, just to
replace the worn-out rags in which I had found him, and desired him in
a day or two, when he got them into a {247} serviceable form, to come
to me, that I might see what his capacity was, and by what means he
could best earn a subsistence.

〈AN ACCOMPLISHED ROGUE.〉

It is unnecessary to enter into the long and artful stories he
invented. The short result was this: that he had been a steward of
a merchant ship—had been in the West Indies, and on other voyages;
that having, on his return from some voyage, been reduced by illness
to spend all his little earnings, and even to sell his clothes, and
having no friends in London, he could not go amongst the merchant
captains for want of decent clothes to appear in. This difficulty was
partially removed by my giving him a suit. He called one day to tell me
that he had succeeded in getting the situation of steward in a small
West Indiaman, and that he did not like to sell or exchange a pair of
top-boots which I had given him without asking my permission, which,
of course, I gave. He told me that if he sold the boots, and purchased
light, gaudy-coloured waistcoating, he might do a little profitable
business with the niggers. He showed me the card of the shop in
Monmouth Street at which he had commenced a negotiation about the sale
of the boots, and another, in the same street, at which he proposed to
purchase the waistcoats. He gave me the name of his ship, and of its
captain, and the day of sailing. I flattered myself that he was now in
a fair position to get a fresh start in life.

A few evenings after the ship was supposed to have sailed he called at
my house, in the midst of heavy rain, apparently much agitated, and
stated that, in raising their anchor, an accident had happened, by
which the captain’s leg had been broken.

He also said that, being sent up with the ship’s boat to fetch the new
captain, he could not resist calling at my house {248} once more to
express all his gratitude. I confess I entertained some suspicion about
this story; but I said nothing.

The next morning I found that during his visit he had extracted
something more from my female servants, upon whose sympathy he had
worked, and who had previously contributed very liberally to his wants.

〈CONSULTATION AT BOW STREET.〉

I now went to search for him in his old haunts, and with much
difficulty ascertained that he had been living riotously at some
public-house in another quarter, and had been continually drunk.

My next step was to go to Bow Street and consult Sir Richard Birnie.
Having explained the case, he consulted several of his most skilful
officers; but none were acquainted with the man. Sir Richard remarked
that he was a very adroit fellow, and that it was doubtful whether he
had actually committed an act of swindling. I inquired what I should do
in case I found him. The magistrate replied, “Bring him before me;” but
he did not indicate the slightest expectation of my accomplishing that
object.

Having thanked Sir Richard, I withdrew, determined, if the fellow were
in London, I would catch him.

I now renewed my inquiries, which at first were ineffectual. One day
it occurred to me that, as he had shown me two cards of shopkeepers in
Monmouth Street, I might possibly, by cautious inquiry, get some clue
to his whereabouts.

Although it was Sunday when this idea occurred, I immediately commenced
at one end of the street to knock at each door, apologize to the
landlord or landlady, and, shortly stating my case, to inquire if they
could throw any light upon the subject. I went up one side of the
street, and down part of the other, having at two places gained some
traces of the fellow. {249}

〈MORNING VISIT TO ST. GILES’S.〉

I will say, to the credit of the then residents, some of whom I
intruded upon at their dinner hour, that I received in no one instance
the slightest incivility, nor even coldness.

The most important information I obtained was, that a certain pot-boy
(name and name of his public-house both unknown) would probably be able
to give me some clue.

I next took my station at the northern end of Monmouth Street, and
during three hours accosted every pot-boy who passed. At last I got
hold of the right one, and so ultimately obtained the information I
wanted.

The fellow was then arrested, and brought before Sir R. Birnie. The
magistrate was much surprised that so clever a fellow should not have
been known to any of his officers. After a long examination, I stated
to the magistrate, that though I was very reluctant to appear before
the public in such a case, yet that if he thought it a public duty, I
should not shrink from it. Sir Richard remarked, that the inconvenience
of my attending two or three days to prosecute would be very great—that
the fellow was so accomplished an artist, that it was very doubtful if
he could be convicted. He then added, that the best thing to be done
for the man himself would be, if I could produce any new evidence, that
he should be remanded for a week, to hear it, and then be discharged
with a caution from the bench.

As my servants could give additional evidence, the fellow was remanded
for a week, then duly lectured and discharged.

In the course of my efforts to inform myself of the real wants of
those around me, I profited much by the experience of one or two
friends, both most excellent and kind-hearted men, whose official
duties rendered them far more conversant than myself with the subject.
Mr. Walker and Mr. Broderip, both of them magistrates, were amongst
my intimate friends. {250} Mr. Walker, the author of “The Original,”
maintained that no one ever was actually starved in London, except
through his own folly or fault.

〈VALUABLE MAGISTRATES.〉

The result of my own experience leads me to recommend all those who do
not possess time and the requisite energies for personal inquiries, to
place the means they wish to devote to charity in the hands of some
sensible and kind-hearted magistrate.

I have been present, in the course of my life, at many cases brought
before our London police magistrates. They possess an immense power of
doing good—a power of making the law respected, not by its punishments,
but by their own kindliness of manner and thoughtful consideration for
the feelings of those brought into close contact with them.

Plain common sense, a kind heart, and, above all, the feelings of a
thorough gentleman, are invaluable qualities in a magistrate. They give
dignity to the court over which he presides, as well as an example
which will be insensibly followed by all its officers. I have seen
cases from which my own avocations have imperatively called me away,
when I would gladly have remained to admire the kindness and the tact
with which entangled questions have been gradually brought to a humane
and just conclusion.

{251}




CHAPTER XX.

THEATRICAL EXPERIENCE.


 The Philosopher in a Tableau at the Feet of Beauty — Tableau encored
 — Philosopher at the Opera of ‘Don Juan’ — Visits the Water-works
 above and the dark expanse below the Stage — Seized by two Devils
 on their way up to fetch Juan — Cheated the Devils by springing off
 to a beam at an infinite distance, just as his head appeared to the
 Audience through the trap-door — The Philosopher writes a Ballet — Its
 rehearsal — Its high moral tone — Its rejection on the ground of the
 probable combustion of the Opera-house.

I was never particularly devoted to theatrical representations. Tragedy
I disliked, and comedy, which I enjoyed, frequently excited my feelings
more than the dignity of the philosophic character sanctioned. In fact,
I could not stand the reconciliation scenes.

I did, however, occasionally, in one or two rare instances, _assist_
in a tableau. I still remember my delight when personating a dead
body, with my head towards the audience, I lay motionless at the feet
of three angels, entranced by their beauty, and whose charms still
fascinate my imagination, and still retain their wonted power over my
own sex.

We enacted the scene so admirably that our performance was twice
encored. But though thus “thrice slain,” the near proximity of beauty
speedily revived the ‘caput mortuum’ at its feet.

On one occasion having joined a party of friends in their box at the
opera of ‘Don Juan,’ I escaped, by half a second, {252} a marvellous
adventure. Somewhat fatigued with the opera, I went behind the scenes
to look at the mechanism. One of the scene-shifters of whom I had
made an inquiry, found out that I, like himself, was a workman. He
immediately offered to take me all over the theatre, and show me every
part.

〈ADVENTURE AT THE OPERA.〉

We ascended to the roof to examine the ventilation, by which, if
stopped, the spectators, in case of accident or of a row, might be
suffocated. Also, the vast water-tanks by which, in case of fire, they
might be drowned. After long rambling and descending endless steps, I
found myself in a vast dark and apparently boundless area; the flat
wooden roof high above my head was supported by upright timbers, some
having intermediate stages like large dissecting-tables. Here and there
three lamps, rivalling rushlights, made the obscurity more visible, and
the carpentry more incomprehensible.

Suddenly a little bell rang—the signal for my scene-shifting friend
to take his post. He pointed to one of the dismal imitations of a
rushlight, and said: “You see that light; on its left is a door, go
through that, and straight on until you arrive at daylight.” Instantly
my friend became invisible in the surrounding gloom.

My first step when thus suddenly abandoned, was to mount on a
large oblong platform about six feet above the floor. Here I was
philosophically contemplating the surrounding obscure vacuity, in order
that I might fully “comprehend the situation.”

Suddenly a flash of lightning occurred. On looking up, high above my
head I saw an opening as large as the platform on which I stood. All
there was brightness. Whilst I was admiring this new light, and seeking
my way to the upper and outer world, two devils with long forked tails
jumped upon the platform, one at each end. {253}

〈ESCAPE FROM THE DEVILS.〉

“What do you do here?” said Devil No. 1.

Before I could invent a decent excuse, Devil No. 2 exclaimed:

“You must not come with us.”

This was consolatory and reassuring, so I replied—

“Heaven forbid.”

During this colloquy, the table, the philosopher, and the devils, were
all slowly moving upward to the open trap-door of the stage above.
Seeing a beam some feet higher at a moderate distance, I inquired
whether it was fixed and would bear my weight? “Yes,” said Devil No. 1.

“But you cannot reach it at a jump,” added Devil No. 2.

“Trust that to me,” said I, “to get out of your clutches.”

We had now reached the level of the desired beam, though not near
enough for a jump. However, still ascending, we passed it: then
stooping my head and bending my body to avoid the floor of the stage,
which we were fast approaching, I sprang down on the beam of refuge. My
two missionary companions continued their course to the world above in
order to convey the wicked Juan to the realms below. My transit through
the dark, subterranean abyss to my own world above was rapid. I soon
rejoined my companions, who congratulated me on what they represented
as my ‘undeserved escape:’ kindly hoping that I might be equally
fortunate upon some future occasion.

Presence of mind frequently arises from having previously considered a
variety of possible events. I had never contemplated such a situation,
and have often asked myself and others what should have been my
conduct, in case I had not escaped from my satanic companions; but no
satisfactory conclusion has yet presented itself.

〈STALL AT THE OPERA.〉

During one season, I had a stall at the German Opera. {254} One
evening, in the cloister scene by moonlight, in the convent, I observed
that the white bonnet of my companion had a pink tint: so also had the
paper of our books and every white object around us.

This contrast of colour suggested to me the direct use of coloured
lights. The progress of science in producing intense lights by the
oxy-hydrogen blowpipe, and by electricity under its various forms,
enabled me to carry out the idea of producing coloured lights for
theatrical representations. I made many experiments by filling cells
formed by pieces of parallel plate glass with solutions of various
salts of chrome of copper, and of other substances.

The effects were superb. I then devised a dance, in which they might
be splendidly exhibited. This was called the rainbow dance. I proposed
to abolish the foot-lights, and instead of them to substitute four
urns with flowers. These urns would each conceal from the audience an
intense light of one of the following colours: blue, yellow, red, or
any others which might be preferable.

The rays of light would be projected from the vases towards the stage,
and would form four cones of red, blue, yellow, and purple light
passing to its further end.

Four groups, each of fifteen danseuses in pure white, would now enter
on the stage. Each group would assume the colour of the light in which
it was placed. Thus four dances each of a different colour would
commence. Occasionally, a damsel from a group of one colour would
spring into another group, thus resembling a shooting star.

After a time, the coloured lights would expand laterally and overlap
each other, thus producing all the colours of the rainbow. In the mean
time the sixty damsels in pure white forming one vast ellipse, would
dance round, each in turn {255} assuming, as it passed through them,
all the prismatic colours.

I had mentioned these experiments and ideas to a few of my friends,
one of whom spoke of it to Mr. Lumley, the lessee of the Italian Opera
House. He thought it promised well, and ultimately I made a series of
experiments in the great concert-room.

Ropes were stretched across the room, on which were hung in innumerable
forms large sheets of patent net. The various folds and bendings
displayed the lights under endless modifications. Some brilliant
greens, some fiery reds, blues of the brightest hue. Another of these
was an almost perfect resemblance of the dead purple powdery coating of
the finest grapes.

〈THE PHILOSOPHER WRITES A BALLET.〉

Things being thus prepared, I had a consultation with the eminent
_chef-de-ballet_ as to the kind of dance and the nature of the steps to
be adapted to these gorgeous colours. Thus having invented the “Rainbow
Dance” I became still more ambitious, and even thought of writing a
story to introduce it, and to give it a moral character. Hence arose
the beautiful ballet of ‘Alethes and Iris.’

〈ALETHES AND IRIS.〉

Alethes, a priest of the Sun, surrounded by every luxury that earth
can lay at the feet of its god, feels, like all before him, that the
most glorious life is sad without a companion to sympathize with
his feelings and share in his enjoyments. He makes, therefore, a
magnificent sacrifice to the god of this visible creation, and prays
for the gratification of his solitary desire.

Apart from all the inferior orders of his class, in the midst of clouds
of incense, the high priest himself becomes entranced.

He beholds in a vision a distant and lonely spot of bright {256}
light. Advancing towards him, it assumes a circular form, having
a small yellow centre surrounded by a deep blue confined within a
brilliant red circle.

Retaining its shape, but slowly enlarging in size, it becomes
a circular rainbow, out of which emerges a form of beauty more
resplendent than mortal eyes might bear. Approaching the Book of Fate,
which lies closed upon a golden pedestal in this the deepest and most
sacred portion of the Temple of the Sun, she opens it and inscribes in
purple symbols these mystic signs.

 ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
 ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
 ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·
 ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·   ·

Then waving her graceful arm over the entranced high priest, she
re-enters the aërial circle: it closes and retires.

Alethes, recovering from the magic spells his powerful art had wrought,
rushes to the Book of Fate, opens, and reads the revelation it unfolds.

 Through ocean’s depths to southern ice-fields roam,
   Through solid strata seek earth’s central fire,
 Cull from each wondrous field, each distant home,
   An offering meet for her thy soul’s desire.

This gives rise to a series of moving and most instructive dioramas, in
which the travels of Alethes are depicted.

 1. A representation of all the inhabitants of the ocean, comprising
 big fishes, lobsters, and various crustacea, mollusca, coralines, &c.

 2. A view of the antarctic regions,—a continent of ice with an active
 volcano and a river of boiling water, supplied by geysers cutting
 their way through cliffs of blue ice.

 3. A diorama representing the animals whose various {257} remains are
 contained in each successive layer of the earth’s crust. In the lower
 portions symptoms of increasing heat show themselves until the centre
 is reached, which contains a liquid transparent sea, consisting of
 some fluid at a white heat, which, however, is filled up with little
 infinitesimal eels, all of one sort, wriggling eternally.

〈HIGH MORAL VIEW.〉

This would have produced a magnificent spectacle considered merely as
a show, but the moralist might, if he pleased, have discovered in it a
profound philosophy.

The ennui and lassitude felt by the priest of the Sun arose from the
want of occupation for his powerful mind. The remedy proposed in the
ballet was—look into all the works of creation.

The central ocean of frying eels was added to assist the teaching of
those ministers who prefer the doctrine of the eternity of bodily
torments.[38]

     [38] An ancestor of mine, Dr. Burthogge, a great friend of John
     Locke, wrote, I regret to say it, a book to prove the eternity of
     torments; so I felt it a kind of hereditary duty to give him a
     lift. The arguments, such as they are, of my wealthy and therefore
     revered ancestor are contained in a work whose title is “Causa
     Dei; or, an Apology for God,” wherein the perpetuity of infernal
     torments is evinced, and Divine justice (that notwithstanding)
     defended. By Richard Burthogge, M.D. London: Imprinted at the
     Three Daggers, Fleet Street, 1675.

     The learned Tobias Swinden, M.A., late rector of Cuxton, in his
     “Enquiry into the Nature and Place of Hell,” 2nd edition, 1727,
     has discovered that its locality is in the Sun. The accurate map
     he gives of that luminary renders it highly probable that the red
     flames so well observed and photographed by Mr. De La Rue during a
     recent total eclipse have a _real_ existence.

The night proposed for the experiment of the dance at length arrived.
Two fire-engines duly prepared were placed on the stage under the care
of a portion of the fire brigade.

About a dozen danseuses in their white dresses danced and attitudinized
in the rays of powerful oxy-hydrogen {258} blowpipes. The various
brilliant hues of coloured light had an admirable effect on the lovely
fire-flies, especially as they flitted across from one region of
coloured light to another.

〈COMBUSTION THE ENEMY OF GENIUS.〉

A few days after I called on Mr. Lumley, to inquire what conclusion he
had arrived at. He expressed great admiration at the brilliancy of the
colours and the effect of the Rainbow Dance, but much feared the danger
of fire. I tried to reassure him; and to show that I apprehended no
danger from fire, added, that I should myself be present every night.
Mr. Lumley remarked that if the house were burnt his customers would
also be burnt with it. This certainly was a valid objection, for though
he could have insured the building, he could not have insured his
audience.

{259}




CHAPTER XXI.

ELECTIONEERING EXPERIENCE.


 The late Lord Lyndhurst candidate for the University of Cambridge —
 The Philosopher refuses to vote for him — The reason why — Example of
 unrivalled virtue — In 1829 Mr. Cavendish was a Candidate for that
 University — The Author was Chairman of his London Committee — Motives
 for putting men on Committees — Of the pairing Sub-Committee — Motives
 for Voting — Means of influencing Voters — Voters brought from Berlin
 and from India — Elections after the Reform Bill, 1832 — The Author
 again requested to be Chairman of Mr. Cavendish’s Committee — Reserves
 three days in case of a Contest for Bridgenorth — It occurs, but is
 arranged — Bridgenorth being secure, the Author gets up a Contest for
 Shropshire — Patriotic Fund sends 500 _l._ to assist the Contest —
 It lasts three days — Reflections on Squibs — Borough of Finsbury —
 Adventure in an Omnibus — A judicious Loan — Subsequent invitation to
 stand for Stroud — Declined — Reflections on improper influence on
 Voters.

When the late Lord Lyndhurst was a candidate for the representation
of the University of Cambridge, I met Mr. ——, a Whig in politics, and
a great friend of Dr. Wollaston. After the usual salutation, he said,
“I hope you will go down to Cambridge and vote for our friend Copley.”
I made no answer, but, looking full in his face, waited for some
explanation. “Oh,” said Mr. ——, “I see what you mean. You think him a
Tory; Copley still is what he always has been—a republican.” I replied
that I was equally unable to vote for him upon that ground, and wished
my friend good morning. {260}

A few evenings after I met the beautiful Lady Copley, who also
canvassed me for my vote for her husband. I had the energy to resist
even this temptation, which I should not have ventured to mention
did not the poll-book enable me to refer to it as a witness of my
unrivalled virtue.

〈CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY ELECTION.〉

Some years after, in 1829, a vacancy again arose in the representation
of the University of Cambridge. Mr. Cavendish having recently waived
the privilege of his rank, which entitled him, after a residence of
two years, to take the degree of Master of Arts, had entered into
competition with the whole of the young men of his own standing, and
had obtained the distinguished position of second wrangler and senior
Smith’s prize man. Under such circumstances, it was quite natural that
all those who felt it important that the accidental aristocracy of
birth should be able to maintain its position by the higher claim of
superior knowledge; as well as all those who took a just pride in their
Alma Mater, should wish to send such a man as their representative to
the House of Commons.

A very large meeting of the electors was held in London, over which the
Earl of Euston presided. It was unanimously resolved to nominate Mr.
Cavendish as a proper person to represent the University of Cambridge
in the House of Commons. A committee was appointed to carry on the
election, of which I was nominated chairman. Similar proceedings
took place at Cambridge. The family of the young but distinguished
candidate were not at first very willing to enter upon the contest. As
it advanced, the committee-room became daily more and more frequented.
Ultimately, in the midst of the London season, and during the sitting
of the House of Commons, this single election excited an intense
interest amongst men of all parties, whilst those who {261} supported
Mr. Cavendish upon higher grounds were not less active than the most
energetic of his political supporters.

〈MOTIVES FOR BEING ON A COMMITTEE.〉

At all elections some few men, perhaps from four or five up to ten
or twelve, do all the difficult and real work of the committee. The
committee itself is, for several reasons, generally very numerous.

All who are supposed to have weight are, of course, put upon it.

Many who wish to appear to have weight get their names upon it.

Some get put upon it thinking to establish a political claim upon the
_party_.

Others because they like to see their names in the newspapers.

Others again, who, if not on _his_ committee, would vote against the
candidate.

There are also idlers and busybodies, who go there to talk or to carry
away something to talk about, which may give them importance in their
own circle.

Young lawyers, of both departments of the profession, are very
numerous, possessing acute perceptions of professional advantage.

A jester and a good story-teller are very useful; but a jolly
and enterprising professor of rhodomontade is on some occasions
invaluable—more especially if he is not an Irishman.

Occasionally a few simply honest men are found upon committees. These
are useful as adjuncts to give a kind of high moral character to the
cause; but the rest of the committee generally think them bores,
and when they differ upon any point from the worldly members, it is
invariably whispered that they are crotchety fellows. {262}

When any peculiarly delicate question arises, it is sometimes important
to eliminate one or more of them temporarily from the real committee
of management. This is accomplished (as in graver matters) by sending
him on an embassy, usually to one of the adepts, with a confidential
mission on a subject represented to him as of great importance. The
adept respectfully asks for his view of the subject, rather opposes
it, but not too strongly; is at last convinced, and ultimately
entirely adopts it. The adept then enters upon the honest simpleton’s
crotchet, trots it out in the most indulgent manner, and at length
sends him back, having done the double service of withdrawing him from
a consultation at which he might have impeded the good cause, and also
of enabling him at any future time to declare truly, if necessary, that
he never was present at any meeting at which even a questionable course
had been proposed.

〈OF THE PAIRING COMMITTEE.〉

One of the most difficult as well as of the most important departments
of some elections is the pairing sub-committee. When I had myself
to arrange it, I generally picked out two of the cleverest and most
quick-witted of the committee. I told them I had perfect confidence
in their judgment and discretion, and therefore constituted them a
sub-committee, with absolute power on all questions of pairing. I also
entirely forbade any appeal to myself. I then advised them to have
attached to them a couple of good and entertaining talkers, to hold in
play the applicants while they retired to ascertain the policy of the
proposed pair.

Upon one occasion, when both my persuasive gentlemen were absent, I
was obliged to officiate myself. I soon discovered that the adverse
vote was very lukewarm in his own cause, and was also very averse to
the prospect of missing a great cricket-match if he went to the poll.
Whilst my {263} pairing committee were making the necessary inquiries,
I was so fortunate as to secure the promise of his vote for my own
candidate at the succeeding election. In the meantime the pairing
committee had kindly taken measures to save him from missing his
cricket-match without, however, wasting a pair.

〈PRIMITIVE PURITY—IT WON’T DO.〉

Yet notwithstanding all my efforts to introduce primitive virtue into
electioneering, I did not always succeed. About a dozen years had
elapsed after one of the elections I had managed, when the subject
was mentioned at a large dinner-table. A supporter of the adverse
political party, referring to the contest, stated as a _merit_ in his
friends that they had succeeded in outwitting their opponents, for on
one occasion they had got a man on their side who had unluckily just
broken his arm, whom they succeeded in pairing off against a sound man
of their adversaries. Remembering my able coadjutors in that contest,
I had little doubt that a good explanation existed; so the next time I
met one of them I mentioned the circumstance. He at once admitted the
fact, and said, “We knew perfectly well that the man’s arm was broken;
but our man, whom we paired off against him, had _no vote_.” He then
added, “We were afraid to tell you of our success.” To which I replied,
“You acted with great discretion.”

University elections are of quite a different class from all others.
The nature of the influences to be brought to bear upon the voters is
of a peculiar kind: the clerical element is large, and they are for the
greater part expectant of something better hereafter.

〈MATERIALS FOR CANVASSING.〉

The first thing to be done in any election contest is to get as exact
a list as possible of the names and addresses of the voters. In a
university contest the chairman should adopt {264} certain letters or
other signs to be used in his own private copy attached to the names of
the clerical voters. These should indicate—

 The books such voter may have written.
 The nature of his preferment.
 The source whence derived.
 The nature of his expectations.
 The source whence expected.
 The age of the impediment.
 The state of its health.
 The chance of its promotion.

Possessed of a full knowledge of all these circumstances, a paragraph
in a newspaper regretting the alarming state of health of some eminent
divine will frequently decide the oscillation even of a cautious voter.

This dodge is the more easily practised because some eminent divines,
on the approach of an university election, occasionally become ill, and
even take to their bed, in order to avoid the bore of being canvassed,
or of committing themselves until they see “how the land lies.”

The motives which induce men to act upon election committees are
various. The hope of advancement is a powerful motive. It was stated
to me by some of my committee, that every really working member of the
committee which a few years before had managed the election of Copley
for the University of Cambridge had already been rewarded by place or
advancement.

My two most active lieutenants in the two contests for Cambridge, to
which I have referred, were not neglected. One of them shortly after
became a Master in Chancery, and the other had a place in India,
producing £10,000 a year. {265}

The highest compliment, however, that party can pay to those who thus
assist them is entirely to ignore their service, and pass them over
on every occasion. This may be done with impunity to the very few who
have such strong convictions that no amount of neglect or ill-usage
can cause them to desert those principles of the soundness of which
their reason is convinced. This course has also the great advantage of
economizing patronage.

Always ascertain who are the personal enemies of the opposing
candidate. If skilfully managed, you may safely depend upon their
becoming the warmest friends of your own. Their enthusiasm can be
easily stimulated: their zeal in the cause may shame some of your
own lukewarm friends into greater earnestness. Men will always give
themselves tenfold more trouble to crush a man obnoxious to their
hatred than they will take to serve their most favoured ally.

When I have been chairman of an election committee I have found it
advantageous to commence my duties early in the morning, and to remain
until late at night. There is always something to be done for the
advancement of the cause. In the first Cambridge election in which I
took part I invariably remained at my post until midnight; and in the
second, I was seldom absent at that hour.

〈GOT A VOTER FROM BERLIN.〉

One evening, being alone, I employed myself in looking through our
lists to find the names of all voters at that period unaccounted for.
The first name which attracted my attention was that of a liberal with
whom I was personally unacquainted. The next day I set at work one of
my investigating committee. In the course of the following day, he had
traced out the voter, who at that time was at Berlin. As there was
ample time for his return, a friend was employed to write to him, and
he returned and voted for our candidate. {266}

〈NEGLECT NO CHANCE.〉

On another evening, the name of Minchin turned up on the list. I
remembered the man, whom I had met very frequently at the rooms of one
of my most intimate friends; but I had not seen him for nearly twenty
years.

The next day, after many inquiries, I found that he had been lost sight
of for a long time, and it was believed that he had gone out to India.
I immediately sent a note to a friend of mine, Captain Robert Locke,
who commanded an Indiaman, to beg of him to look in upon me at the
committee-room. In two hours he called and informed me that Minchin
was a barrister at Calcutta, and was about to return to England. On
my expressing a wish for further particulars, he kindly went into the
City to procure information, and on his return told me that Minchin
was on his voyage home in the “Herefordshire,” an excellent ship. It
was due on a certain day, about a fortnight thence, and would in all
probability not be three days behind its time.

In the evening, being again alone in the committee-room, I resumed the
Minchin question, and found that he might possibly arrive on the second
of the three days’ polling. I therefore wrote the following letter:—

 DEAR MINCHIN,

 If twenty years have not altered your political principles, we have
 now an opportunity of getting in a Liberal to represent our University.

 The three days of polling are —— —— ——

 If you arrive in time, pray come immediately to my committee-room in
 Cockspur Street.

 Yours truly,

 C. BABBAGE.

I addressed this letter to Minchin at Portsmouth, and {267} making two
copies of it, directed them to two other seaports. When I put these
letters into the basket, I smiled at my own simplicity in speculating
on the triple improbability—

 1. That Minchin should ever get my letter.

 2. That his ship, which was expected, should really arrive on the
 second or third of the three days of polling.

 3. That a young lawyer should not have changed his political
 principles in twenty years.

However, I considered that the chance of this election lottery-ticket
winning for us a vote, although very small, was at least worth the
three sheets of letter-paper which it cost our candidate.

〈GOT A VOTER FROM INDIA.〉

Amidst the bustle of the election this subject was entirely forgotten.
The first day of polling arrived, and was concluded, and as usual I
was sitting, at midnight, alone in the large committee-room, when the
door opened, and there entered a man enveloped in a huge box-coat, who
advanced towards me. He held out his hand, and grasping mine, said, “I
have not altered my political principles.” This was Minchin, to whom
the pilot, cruizing about on the look-out for the “Herefordshire,” had
delivered a packet of letters.

The first letter Minchin opened was mine. He immediately went below,
told his wife that he must get into the boat which had just put the
pilot on board, and hasten to Cambridge, whilst she remained with
the children to pursue their voyage to London. Minchin returned in
the pilot-boat to Portsmouth, found a coach just ready to start,
got up on the roof, borrowed a box-coat, and on arriving in London,
drove directly to the committee-room. Finding that it {268} would
be most convenient to Minchin to start immediately for Cambridge, I
sent off a note to the Temple for the most entertaining man[39] upon
the committee; I introduced him to Minchin, and they posted down to
Cambridge, and voted on the second day.

     [39] My friend, John Elliott Drinkwater, afterwards Bethune.

Greatly to the credit and to the advantage of the University, Mr.
Cavendish was elected on this occasion.

       *       *       *       *       *

〈ELECTION AFTER THE REFORM BILL.〉

In May, 1832, after the passing of the Reform Bill, there was a
dissolution of Parliament. At the general election which ensued, Lord
Palmerston and Mr. Cavendish, the two former members, again became
candidates. Two of the most active members of Mr. Cavendish’s former
committee called upon me, one of whom began speaking in somewhat
complimentary phrases of our young candidate. I was listening
attentively to all that could be said in favour of the Cavendish
family, when his companion, suddenly interrupting him, said, “No, ——
that won’t do for Babbage.” He then continued, in terms which I have
no wish to repeat, to speak of our candidate, and concluded by saying,
that they expressed the opinion of all the working members of the
former committee, and came by their desire to request me again to take
the chair during the approaching contest; stating, also, that there was
no other man under whom they would all willingly act. He then entreated
me to be their chairman, not for the sake of the Cavendishes, but for
the sake of the cause.

This appeal was irresistible. I immediately acceded to their request,
but with one reservation, in case my brother-in-law’s seat was
contested, that I should have three days to help him at Bridgenorth.

Under such circumstances the contest commenced. I can {269} truly add,
that amongst the many elections in which I have taken an active working
share, none was ever carried on with greater zeal, nor were greater
efforts ever made to attain success.

I had good reason at its commencement to doubt the success of our
candidate: not from any defect on his part, but entirely on political
grounds. The same reasons induced me to suppose that Lord Palmerston’s
seat was equally in danger. Of course, a tone of perfect confidence
was sustained, and, but for a very inopportune petition signed by a
considerable number of members of the University, I believe that we
might have managed, by a compromise with the other party, to have
secured one seat for our own. As it was, however, both the Liberal
candidates were defeated.

〈BRIDGENORTH BEING SAFE.〉

The contingency I had anticipated did occur. I was sent for, and went
down by the mail to assist Mr. Wolryche Whitmore. On my arrival,
I found that circumstances had entirely changed, and not only my
brother-in-law, but also Mr. Foster, a large iron-master, was to be
returned for Bridgenorth without a contest.

〈A CONTEST FOR SHROPSHIRE STARTED.〉

As soon as I was informed of this arrangement, I took immediate
measures for rejoining my committee in Cockspur Street. On reaching
Bridgenorth, it appeared that four hours would elapse before the mail
to London could arrive. I fortunately found a great number of Mr.
Foster’s most influential supporters assembled at the hotel, comprising
amongst them many of the largest iron-masters and manufacturers in the
county. They were naturally elated at the success of their friend,
which secured to their class a certain amount of influence in the House
of Commons. In the course of conversation, mention was made of the
utter neglect of the manufacturing interests of the district by their
county members. {270} I remarked, that it depended upon themselves to
remedy this evil, and inquired whether they were seriously disposed to
work. One of the party, who had greatly assisted me when I was managing
another contest, and who had ridden over four counties in search of
votes for us, appealed to my own experience of their energy. After some
discussion, I suggested that they should start a rival candidate of
their own for the county.

I then proposed to retire into another room and draw up an address to
the freeholders, and also placards, to be stuck up in every town and
village in the county. I desired them, in the mean time, to divide the
county into districts, of such size that one of our party could in the
course of a day go to every town and large village in his district,
and arrange with one or more tradesmen in our interest to exhibit the
address in their shop-windows. I also desired them to make an estimate
of the number of large and small placards necessary for each town and
village, in order that we might ascertain how many of each need be
printed.

I returned with the addresses to the freeholders. In these the
characters of their late members were lightly sketched, and the public
were informed that a committee in the liberal interest was sitting in
every town in the county, and that at the proper time the name of a fit
candidate would be announced.

My friends cordially concurring in these sentiments, unanimously
adopted the addresses, undertook to publish them in the newspapers,
to arrange their distribution, and organize committees throughout the
county. They were, of course, very anxious to know who was to be their
candidate. I told them at once that it was not to be expected that they
could succeed in their first attempt, but that such a course would
{271} assuredly secure for them in future much more attention to their
interests from their county members. With respect to a candidate, if
they could not themselves find one, these placards and advertisements
would without doubt produce one.

I may here mention that a member of the Cambridge committee in
Cockspur Street had taken rooms at the Crown and Anchor, and, in
conjunction with many other Liberals, instituted the Patriotic Fund,
for the purpose of collecting subscriptions for the support of liberal
candidates at the first elections under the Reform Bill. A very large
sum was soon subscribed.

In the broadsides and placards issued in Shropshire, I had taken care
to allude to this fund in large capitals.

I now got into the mail for London, amidst the hearty congratulations
of my Shropshire friends. During the few minutes’ rest at Northampton,
I had an opportunity of seeing a member of the Liberal committee and
of informing him of our proceedings in Shropshire, and afterwards of
conveying his report of the prospects of the contest in that town to
our friends in London.

Two or three days after every town, and almost every village in
Shropshire, was enlightened by my placards; and in the course of a few
days more, three candidates were in the field.

〈PATRIOTIC FUND AIDS IT WITH £500.〉

On my return to London I communicated with the Patriotic Fund, who sent
down 500 _l._ to support the party in Shropshire. After a short contest
the Liberal party was of course beaten; but the diversion produced the
intended effect.

       *       *       *       *       *

One portion of electioneering tactics is thought to consist in the
manufacture of squibs. These should never give pain nor allude to
any personal defect or inevitable evil. They {272} ought either to
produce a broad laugh or that involuntary smile which true wit usually
provokes. They are productive of little effect except the amusement of
the supporters engaged in carrying on the contest.

My own share in elections has generally been in more serious
departments. I remember, however, a very harmless squib which I
believed equally amused both parties, and which, I was subsequently
informed, was concocted in Mr. Cavendish’s committee-room.

High mathematical knowledge is by no means a very great qualification
in a candidate for the House of Commons, nor is the absence of it any
disparagement. In the contest to which I refer, the late Mr. Goulburn
was opposed to Mr. Cavendish. The following paragraph appeared in the
‘Morning Post:’—

 “The Whigs lay great stress on the academical distinction attained
 by Mr. Cavendish. Mr. Goulburn, it is true, was not a candidate for
 university honours; but his scientific attainments are by no means
 insignificant. He has succeeded in the exact rectification of a
 circular arc; and he has likewise discovered the equation of the
 lunar caustic, a problem likely to prove of great value in nautical
 astronomy.”

It appears that late one evening a cab drove up in hot haste to the
office of the ‘Morning Post,’ delivered the copy as coming from Mr.
Goulburn’s committee, and at the same time ordered fifty _extra_ copies
of the ‘Post’ to be sent next morning to their committee-room.

       *       *       *       *       *

〈CONTEST FOR FINSBURY.〉

During my own contest for the borough of Finsbury few incidents worth
note occurred. One day, as I was returning in an omnibus from the City,
an opportunity presented itself by which I acquired a few votes. A
gentleman at the extreme end of the omnibus being about to leave it,
asked the {273} conductor to give him change for a sovereign. Those
around expressed their opinion that he would acquire bad silver by the
exchange. On hearing this remonstrance, I thought it a good opportunity
to make a little political capital, which might perhaps be improved by
a slight delay. So I did not volunteer my services until a neighbour
of the capitalist who possessed the sovereign had offered him the loan
of a sixpence. It was quite clear that the borrower would ask for
the address of the lender, and tolerably certain that it would be in
some distant locality. So, in fact, it turned out: Richmond being the
abode of the benevolent one. Other liberal individuals offered their
services, but they only possessed half-sovereigns and half-crowns.

〈A JUDICIOUS LOAN—SIXPENCE.〉

In the mean time I had taken from my well-loaded breast-pocket one
of my own charming addresses to my highly-cultivated and independent
constituents, and having also a bright sixpence in my hand, I
immediately offered the latter as a loan, and the former as my address
for repayment. I remarked at the same time that my committee-room on
Holborn Hill, at which I was about to alight, would be open continually
for the next five weeks. This offer was immediately accepted, and
further extensive demands were instantly made upon my pocket for other
copies of my address.

My immediate neighbour, having read its fascinating contents, applied
to me for more copies, saying that he highly agreed with my sound and
patriotic views, would at once promise me six votes, and added that
he would also immediately commence a canvass in his own district. On
arriving at my committee-room I had already acquired other supporters.
Indeed, I am pretty sure I carried the whole of my fellow-passengers
with me: for I left the omnibus amidst the hearty cheers of my
newly-acquired friends. {274}

〈REPAID WITH COMPOUND INTEREST.〉

About a year or two after this long-forgotten loan, I received a letter
from a gentleman whose name I did not recognize as being one of my too
numerous correspondents. It commenced thus:—“Sir, I am the gentleman to
whom you lent sixpence in the omnibus.” He then went on to state, in
terms too flattering for me to repeat, that he had watched the Finsbury
election with the greatest interest, and much deplored the taste of the
electors in rejecting so, &c. &c., a candidate. My friend then informed
me of an approaching vacancy in the borough of Stroud, in which town he
resided. He proceeded to give me an outline of the state of opinion,
and of the wants of the electors, and concluded by saying he was
certain that my opinions would be very favourably received. He also
assured me, if I decided on offering my services to the constituency,
that he should have great pleasure in giving me every support in his
power. In reply, I cordially thanked him for his generous offer, but
declined the proposed honour. In fact, I was not peculiarly desirous
of wasting my time for the benefit of my country. The constituency
of Finsbury had already expressed their opinion that Mr. Wakley and
Mr. Thomas Duncombe were fitter than myself to represent them in
Parliament, and in that decision I most cordially concurred.

       *       *       *       *       *

During some of the early contests for the borough of Marylebone, it too
frequently occurred that ladies drove round to their various tradesmen
to canvass for their votes, threatening, in case of refusal, to
withdraw their custom. This unfeminine conduct occasionally drew upon
them unpleasant though well-deserved rebukes.

〈DISGRACEFUL CANVASSING.〉

In one of those contests I took a considerable interest in favour of a
candidate whom I shall call Mr. A. Meeting {275} a very respectable
tradesman—a plumber and painter, whom I had employed in decorating
my own house—I asked him how he intended to vote. He replied that he
wished to vote for Mr. A., but that one of his customers had been to
his shop and asked him to vote for Mr. Z., threatening, in case he
declined, never to employ him again.

I inquired whether his customer’s house was larger than mine, to which
he replied that mine was twice the size of the other. I then asked
whether his customer was a younger man than myself, to this he replied,
“He is a much older man.”

I then asked him what he would do if I adopted the same line of
conduct, and insisted on his voting for my friend Mr. A. This query
was unanswerable. Of course I did not attempt to make him violate his
extorted promise.

Such conduct is disgraceful, and if of frequent occurrence would have
a tendency to introduce the vote by ballot; a mode of voting for
representatives which, in my opinion, nothing short of the strongest
necessity could justify.

The election for Finsbury gave occasion to the following _jeu
d’esprit_, which, as a specimen of the electioneering _squibs_ of the
day, I give _in extenso:_—

{276}




CHAPTER XXII.

SCENE FROM A NEW AFTER-PIECE,

CALLED

“_Politics and Poetry_;” _or_, “_The Decline of Science_.”


DRAMATIS PERSONÆ.


_PEOPLE OF FASHION_:—

 TURNSTILE, _a retired Philosopher, M.P. for Shoreditch_.
 LORD FLUMM, _a Tory nobleman of ancient family_.
 COUNTESS OF FLUMM, _his wife_.
 LADY SELINA, _their daughter_.
 HON. MRS. FUBSEY, _sister of the Countess_.


_WHIGS_:—

 LORD A., _Prime Minister_.
 CLOSEWIND, _First Lord of the Admiralty_.
 SHIFT, _Secretary at War_.
 SMOOTH, _Secretary for the Colonies; also M.P. for Shoreditch_.


_TORIES_ (_Members of the Conservative Club_):—

 LORD GEORGE,
 LORD CHARLES,
 MARQUIS OF FLAMBOROUGH,
 DICK TRIM, _a former Whipper-in_,


_SHOREDITCH ELECTORS_:—

 HIGHWAY, _a Radical_.
 GRISKIN, _Colonel of the Lumber Troop_.
 TRIPES, _his Lieutenant_.


_PHILOSOPHERS_:—

 SIR ORLANDO WINDFALL, Knt. R. Han. Guelph. Order, _an Astronomical
         Observer_.
 SIR SIMON SMUGG, Knt. R. Han. Guelph. Order, _Professor of Botanism_.
 ATALL, _an Episcopizing Mathematician, Dean of Canterbury_.
 BYEWAYS, _a Calculating Officer_.

_Other Lords—Conservative and Whig._

       *       *       *       *       *

The Scene is laid in London; principally at the West-end of the Town.

The time is near the end of May, 1835. {277}


SCENES, &c., EXTRACTED.


ACT I.


 SCENE I.—_Committee-room of the Conservatives, Charles-street_; LORD
 FLUMM; MARQUIS OF FLAMBOROUGH; LORD GEORGE; LORD CHARLES; _other Tory
 Lords, and_ TRIM. _A table covered with papers_; LORD CHARLES _smoking
 a cigar_; LORD GEORGE _half asleep in an arm-chair_; TRIM _busy in
 looking over a list of the House of Commons_.

_Trim._ It will be a devilish close run I see!—yet I think we might
manage some of them (_Pause_). Does anybody know _Turnstile_?

_Marquis._ Never heard of him!

_Lord George._ (_Mumbling_). The reform Member for Puddledock, isn’t
he?—the author of a book on Pinmaking, and things of that kind. An
ironmonger in Newgate-street!

_Trim._ No, no! Member for Shoreditch;—with Smooth, the Colonial
Secretary!

_Lord Charles._ (_Taking the cigar from his mouth._) I think I’ve heard
something of him at Cambridge: he was Newtonian Professor of Chemistry
when I was at College.

_Trim._ Can’t we talk him over?

_Lord Charles._ No, no! he is too sharp for that.

_Trim._ Will anybody speak to him?—and if he won’t vote with us, keep
him out of the way.

_Marquis._ Perhaps a hint at an appointment!—

_Lord Charles._ Nor that either; he is a fellow of some spirit; and
devilish proud. {278}

_Lord Flumm._ But what are his tastes?—how does he employ himself?—who
are his friends?

_Trim._ Why he’s—a sort of a—philosopher,—that wants to be a man of the
world!

_Lord Flumm._ Oh!—now I begin to recollect;—I must have seen him at
Sir Phillip’s. Leave him to me;—I think Lady Flumm and my daughter can
manage to keep him quiet on Thursday night.

_Trim._ But for Tuesday,—my Lord?

_Lord Flumm._ Two nights!—Then I must try what I can do for you,
myself. [_Exit._


SCENE IV.—_Grosvenor-square._

_Enter_ TURNSTILE, _musing_.

_Turnstile._ This will never do! They make use of me, and laugh at me
in their sleeves;—push me round and go by. That break down _was_ a
devil of a business! They didn’t laugh out to be sure; but they coughed
and looked unutterably!! And where is this to end? What shall I have to
show for it? Confounded loss of time;—to hear those fellows prosing,
instead of seeing the occultation last night. And that book of Ls.’;
so much that _I_ had begun upon,—and might have finished! It never
will do! (_Rousing himself after a pause._) But knowledge, after all,
_is_ power! That at least is certain,—power—to do what? to refuse Lord
Doodle’s invitation; and to ask Lord Humbug for a favour, which it is
ten to one he will refuse! But the Royal Society is defunct! That I
_have_ accomplished. Gilbert, and the Duke! and the Secretaries! I have
driven them all before me!—and, now, though _I_ must not be a knight of
the Guelphic order, (yet a riband is a pretty looking thing! and {279}
a star too!—) I will show that I can teach _them_ how to make knights;
and describe the decorations that other men are to wear. But here comes
Lord Flumm, and I am saved the bore of calling upon him.


SCENE V.

_Enter_ LORD FLUMM.

_Lord Flumm._ Mr. Turnstile, if I do not mistake! My dear Turnstile:
how glad I am to see you again! it _was_ kind of Sir Phillip to
introduce me. You know that you are near our house; and Lady Flumm will
be so happy——

_Turnstile._ In truth, my Lord, I was about to call upon you.
After what you were so good as to say last night, I took the first
opportunity.

_Lord Flumm._ Well, that _is_ kind. But you did not speak last night.
How came that? I don’t find you in the paper, yet the subject was quite
your own. Tallow and bar-iron, raw materials and machinery. Ah, my dear
sir! when science condescends to come among us mortals, the effects to
be expected _are_ wonderful indeed!

_Turnstile._ My Lord, you flatter. But we have reached your door.
(_Aside._) [Confound him!—But I am glad he was not in the house. It’s
clear he hasn’t heard of the break down.]

_Lord Flumm._ While I have you to myself, Turnstile, remember that you
dine with me on Tuesday. I am to have two friends, Lord S—— and Sir
George Y——, who wish very much to be acquainted with you. Half-past
seven.

_Turnstile._ You are very good, my lord. I dare not refuse so kind an
invitation. [_Exeunt._ {280}


SCENE VI.—LADY FLUMM’S _drawing-room_. LADY FLUMM _at the
writing-table_. MRS. FUBSEY _at work on a sofa_.

_Enter_ LORD FLUMM _and_ TURNSTILE.

_Lord Flumm._ Lady Flumm, this is Mr. Turnstile, whom you have so long
wished to know. Mr. Turnstile,—Lady Flumm.

_Lady Flumm._ _The_ Mr. Turnstile. My dear sir, I am too happy to
see you. We had just been speaking of your delightful book. Selina!
(_Calling._) [_Enter_ LADY SELINA.] This is Mr. Turnstile.

_Lady Selina._ Indeed!

_Lady Flumm._ Yes, indeed! You see he is a mortal man after all. Bring
me, my love, the book you will find open on the table in the boudoir. I
wish to show Mr. Turnstile the passages I have marked this morning.

_Lady Selina._ (_Returning with the book, and running over the
leaves._) “Lace made by caterpillars.”—“Steam-engines with
fairy fingers.”—“Robe of nature.”—“Sun of science.”—“Faltering
worshipper.”—“Altar of truth.” It _is, indeed_, delightful! The taste,
the poetical imagination, are surprising. I hope, Mr. Turnstile,—indeed
I am sure, that you love music?

_Turnstile._ Not _very_ particularly, I must acknowledge (_smiling_); a
barrel-organ is the instrument most in my way.

_Lady Flumm._ (_Smiling._) Music and machinery, Mr. Turnstile. Polite
literature and mathematics. You _do_ know how to combine. Others must
judge of the profounder parts of your works; but the style, and the
fancy, are what I should most admire.—You dine with Lord Flumm, he
tells me, on Tuesday. Now you _must_ come to _me_ on Thursday night.

_Turnstile._ I am sorry to say, that, on recollection, I _ought_ to
{281} have apologized to Lord Flumm. The Pottery Question stands for
Tuesday; and I should be there, as one of the Committee; and Thursday,
your Ladyship knows, is the second reading of the Place and Pension
Bill.

_Lady Flumm._ Oh, we are Staffordshire people! _that_ will excuse you
to the pottery folks; and, for Thursday, I _will_ absolutely take no
excuse. We have Pasta and Donzelli! perhaps a quadrille afterwards—(you
dance, Mr. Turnstile?)—and Lady Sophia C—— and her cousin, Lord F——,
have said _so much_ about those beautiful passages at the end of your
book, that they will be quite disappointed if I do not keep my promise
to introduce them. (_Touching his arm with her finger._)

_Turnstile._ Your Ladyship knows how to conquer: I feel that I _cannot_
refuse. [_Exit._


SCENE VII.—_Grosvenor-square; before_ LORD FLUMM’S _house_.

_Enter_ TURNSTILE, _from the house_.

_Turnstile._ This is all very delightful; but what will they say at
Shoreditch?—twice in one week absent from the House, and at two Tory
parties.

_Enter_ GRISKIN, _hastily, heated; his hat in his left hand; a
pocket-handkerchief in his right_.

_Griskin._ Mr. Turnstile, I’m glad to find you; just called on you,
as I came to this quarter to look after a customer—long way from the
City—sorry not to hear from you.

_Turnstile._ Why, really, Mr. Griskin, I am very sorry; but I am not
acquainted with the Commander-in-chief. And I must say that I should
not know how to press for the {282} contract, knowing that your
nephew’s prices are thirty per cent., at least, above the market.

_Griskin._ That’s being rather nice, I should say, Mr. Turnstile. My
nephew is as good a lad as ever stood in shoe-leather; and has six good
wotes in Shoreditch,—and, as to myself, Mr. Turnstile, I must say that,
after all I did at your election—and in such wery hot weather—I did not
expect you’d be so wery particular about a small matter.—Sir, I wish
you a good morning.

_Turnstile._ (_Bowing and looking after him._) So this fellow, like the
rest of them, thinks that I am to do his jobs, and to neglect my own.
And this is your _reformed_ Parliament.


SCENE IX.—_The street, near_ TURNSTILE’S _house_.

_Enter_ TRIPES _and_ SMOOTH, _meeting_.

_Smooth._ (_Taking both_ TRIPES’ _hands_). My dear Tripes, how d’ye
do?—Pray, how is your good lady?—What a jolly party at your house last
night! and Mrs. Tripes, I hope, is none the worse for it?

_Tripes._ Oh dear sir, no! Mrs. Tripes and my daughters were _so_
pleased with your Scotch singing.

_Smooth._ And your boys, how are they?—fine, promising, active
fellows.—You’ve heard from MacLeech?

_Tripes._ Just received the note as I left home.

_Smooth._ All is quite right, you see, your cousin has the appointment
at the Cape. I knew MacLeech was just the man for the details. A ship,
I find, is to sail in about three weeks; and (_significantly_) I don’t
think your cousin need be _very_ scrupulous about freight and passage.

_Tripes._ You are too good, Mr. Smooth. I’m sure if anything that I can
do,—my sense of all your kindness—— {283}

_Smooth._ I was thinking, when I saw those fine lads of yours, that
another assistant to my under secretary’s deputy—but (between you and
me) Hume thinks that one is more than enough. We must wait a little.

_Takes_ TRIPES’ _arm_. [_Exeunt._

SCENE X.—TURNSTILE’S _parlour_, 11½ A. M. _Breakfast on the table;
pamphlets and newspapers. In the corners of the room, books and
philosophical instruments, dusty and thrown together; heaps of
Parliamentary Reports lying above them._ TURNSTILE _alone, musing, and
looking over some journals_.

_Turnstile._ This headache! Impossible to sleep when one goes to
bed by daylight. Experiments by Arago! Ah! a paper by Cauchy, on my
own subject. But here is this cursed committee in Smithfield to be
attended; and it is already past eleven. (_Rising_).

[_Knock at the hall door._]

_Enter Servant._

_Servant._ Mr. Tripes, sir.

_Turnstile._ Show him in. He comes, no doubt, to say that my election
is arranged. A good, fat-headed, honest fellow.

_Enter_ TRIPES.

Well Mr. Tripes, I’m glad to see you. Pray take a chair.

_Tripes._ We hoped to have seen you at the meeting yesterday, sir.
Capital speech from Mr. Smooth. You know, of course, that Mr. Highway
is a candidate; and Mr. MacLeech is talked of;—very sorry, indeed, you
weren’t there.

_Turnstile._ A transit of Venus, Mr. Tripes, is a thing that does not
happen every day. Besides, my friend, Stellini {284} from Palermo, is
here; and I had promised to go with him to Greenwich.

_Tripes._ Almost a pity, sir, to call off your attention from such
objects. But in the City we are men of business, you know,—plain,
every-day people.

_Turnstile._ It was unlucky; but I could not help it. The committee, I
hope, is by this time at work?

_Tripes._ It was just that, I called about. I wished to tell you
myself how very sorry I am that I cannot be your chairman. But—my
large family—press of business,—in short,—you must excuse me;—and, if
I should be upon Mr. Smooth’s committee, I don’t well see how I can
attend to both.

_Turnstile._ Smooth!—but he and I go together, you know,—at least, I
understood it so.

_Tripes._ I’m glad to hear it; I feared there might be some mistake.
And, if Mr. MacLeech comes forward,—being a fellow-townsman of Mr.
Smooth, and a good deal in the Glasgow interest;—a commercial man too,
Mr. Turnstile;—a _practical_ man—Mr. Turnstile;—I am not quite sure
that you can count upon Mr. Smooth’s assistance;—and Government, you
know, is strong.

_Turnstile._ Assistance, Mr. Tripes,—from Smooth!—why I came in
on my own ground;—on the _Independent_ interest.—Assistance from
Smooth!—Besides,—Smooth knows very well that _our_ second votes secured
him.

_Tripes._ Very true, sir; but these Independent people are hard to deal
with; and Mr. Highway, I assure you, hit very hard in his speech at the
meeting yesterday. He talked of amateur politicians,—attention to the
business of the people,—dinners with the opposite party. In short, I
fear, they will say,—like the others,—that what they want is something
{285} of “a _practical man_” Mr. Turnstile.—I’m sorry that I must be
going.—Sir, your servant.

_Turnstile._ (_Rising and ringing._) [_Enter servant._] Open the door
for Mr. Tripes. [_Exit_ TRIPES.] D——d, double-faced, selfish blockhead!


SCENE XI.—_The street, as before._

_Enter_ TRIPES, _from_ TURNSTILE’S _house_.

_Tripes._ (_Putting on his hat._) He might have been more civil,
too;—though he did count upon me for his chairman. But I’ll show him
that I’m not to be insulted; and if, MacLeech manages the matter well
for Charles, this _Mr. Philosopher Turnstile_, though he thinks himself
so clever, may go to the devil. [_Exit._


ACT II.

SCENE I.—_Downing-street, after a Cabinet Meeting._ LORD A.; CLOSEWIND;
SHIFT; SMOOTH; _and other Members of the Cabinet_.

_Lord A._ That point being settled, gentlemen, the sooner you are at
your posts the better. The King comes down to dissolve on Friday.[40]
But, before we part, we had better {286} decide about this Presidency
of the Board of Manufactures. The appointment requires an able man; of
_rather_ peculiar attainments. Mr. Turnstile has been mentioned to me;
and his claims I am told, are strong:—long devotion to science,—great
expense and loss of time for public objects,—high reputation, and
weight of opinion, as a man of science.

     [40] Parliament is ordinarily dissolved by Proclamation, after
     having been previously prorogued. However, there is at least one
     modern instance to justify the historical consistency of the text,
     namely, that which occurred on the 10th June, 1818, when the
     Prince Regent, afterwards George IV., dissolved the Parliament
     in person. The Dramatist cannot therefore be properly accused of
     drawing heedlessly upon his imagination, though even had he thus
     far transgressed the boundaries of historical truth, Horace’s
     maxim might have been pleaded in excuse:—

                          “Pictoribus atque Poetis
        Quidlibet audendi semper fuit æqua potestas.”

_Smooth._ I believe that he has left _science_; at least, he wishes it
to be so considered. He is my colleague at Shoreditch; and, of course,
I wish to support him;—but,—when business is to be done;—and men,—and
things, to be brought together,—I own,—I _doubt_—whether a more
practical man,—might not——

_Shift._ And _that_ poor Turnstile certainly is not. He must always
have _a reason_;—nothing but the _quod erat demonstrandum_; a romancer;
if you have anything to do, his first object is _to do it well_. I am
quite sure he will not answer our purpose.

_Closewind._ He talks too much about consistency; and on party
questions, you are never sure of him: last week he did not divide with
us, on either night.

_Lord A._ Well; _I_ am quite indifferent. I did hear of his being at
Lord Flumm’s; and after what had just passed in the Lords, a personal
friend of mine would, perhaps, have kept away from that quarter. Is
there no other person?

_Smooth._ (_Hesitatingly._) Davies Gilbert.

_Shift._ (_Laughing._) Pooh! Pooh! Poor Gilbert! No, that will never do.

_Smooth._ Or—Warburton?

_Shift._ (_Sneering._) Worse and worse!—if _ever_ there was an
impracticable——

_Closewind._ But we don’t know that Turnstile is sure of his seat.
Smooth, hasn’t MacLeech been talked of for Shoreditch? {287}

_Smooth._ He’s _certain_ of succeeding! The independent gentlemen don’t
quite like Turnstile—they wish for Highway—and the split will foil them
both. MacLeech—now that he has been mentioned—I must acknowledge, does
seem to me to be the _very_ man for the manufactures,—a practical,
persevering man of business,—never absent from the House,—excellent
Scotch connections,—a cousin of the Duke of Y.’s——.

_Lord A._ That is a good point, certainly. An appointment given there
would be candid and liberal;—it might conciliate——

_Closewind._ A very civil, excellent fellow, too. MacLeech, _I_ should
say, is the man.

_Shift._ I quite agree with you.

_Smooth._ I confess, I think he will fill the office well. And if it is
thought quite necessary that Hume’s motion to reduce the salary,—though
it is not large——

_Closewind._ Oh, no! The salary had better remain;—2000 _l._ is not too
much. Besides, the _principle_ of giving way is bad.

_Lord A._ Well, gentlemen, let it be so. Smooth, you will let MacLeech
know that he has the office.

_Smooth._ And at the present salary?

_Lord A._ Agreed. [_Exeunt._


SCENE IV.—_The Athenæum Club._ SMOOTH _and_ ATALL _at a table_.

_Smooth._ I saw it this morning on the breakfast-table at Lord A’s; it
is an admirable article, and I was told is yours.

_Atall._ (_Decliningly._) These things, you know, are always supposed
to be anonymous. But I am not sorry that you liked the paper. Did his
lordship speak of it? {288}

_Smooth._ The book was open at the article upon the table. It does
you honour. Hits _just_ the happy point,—hints probable _intentions_,
without giving any pledge,—enough to please the Liberals,—and full room
for _explanation_, if any change becomes expedient. The true plan,
believe me, for a ministry, in times like these, is to proceed _en
tâtonnant_.—Pray, Mr. Dean, how is the Bishop of Hereford?

_Atall._ I didn’t know that he was particularly ill. He has long been
feeble.

_Smooth._ These complainers do sometimes hold out. But they cannot last
for ever.—We meet I hope to-morrow at the levee. You _ought_ to be
there.

_Atall._ I have come to town for the purpose; having secured, I think,
Closewind’s election at Cambridge.

_Smooth._ Well done, my very good friend! Men of talent should always
pull together. Sorry that I must go; but we meet to-morrow. (_Shaking
hands very cordially._) [_Exit._


SCENE VI.—BYEWAYS’ _lodgings_. BYEWAYS _alone, writing_.

_Enter_ TURNSTILE.

_Turnstile._ My dear Byeways; I want your assistance. Deserted by those
shabby dogs the Radicals, and tricked, I fear, by the Whigs, I find I
have no chance of a decent show of numbers at the next election, if my
scientific friends do not support me with spirit. Even so, it _can_
be only an honourable retreat. I count upon _you_,—you understand
the world;—and as soon as we can muster a committee, you must be my
chairman.

_Byeways._ My good friend, don’t be in a hurry; sit down and tell me
all about it. I know you don’t care much about your seat,—and after
all,—it is,—to you, a waste of {289} time;—but, with the Independents
at your back, you are secure. As to me, my dear fellow, you know that I
am——

_Turnstile._ But man! the Independents, as you call them, have taken up
Highway; he blusters, and goes any length.

_Byeways._ But Smooth, you know, is strong in Shoreditch,—Government
interest,—you brought him in last time; and you and he, together——

_Turnstile._ I know it; but he says he is not _strong enough_ to run
any risk. If you will be my chairman, with a good committee, we may at
least die game.

_Byeways._ My dear Turnstile, you know how glad I always am to serve
you—and you know what _I think_;—but in my situation, my dear fellow,
it is quite impossible that I can _oppose_ the ministers. MacLeech
too, they say, is a candidate; and his brother-in-law’s uncle was very
civil, last year, in Scotland, to my wife’s cousin.—But I _have_ a plan
for you. There is Atall, just come to town; make _him_ your chief,
and bring the Cambridge men together. The clergy were always strong
in Shoreditch. Atall can speak to them.—I am obliged to go to the War
Office.—And you had better lose no time in seeing Atall. Sorry to bid
you good-bye. [_Exit._

_Turnstile._ Well, this _is_ strange! yet I thought I might have
counted upon Byeways. [_Exit._


SCENE VIII.—LADY FLUMM’S _Drawing-room_. LADY FLUMM; LADY SELINA; HON.
MRS. FUBSEY.

_Mrs. Fubsey._ But, my dear sister; how _can_ you so beflatter that
poor man? You don’t know all the mischief you may do to him.

_Lady Flumm._ “Poor man!” I cannot pity him. His maxim is, that
knowledge is power; and he thinks _his_ {290} knowledge is all that
can be known. He has to learn that _our_ knowledge, also, is power; and
that we know how to use it too.

_Enter_ LORD FLUMM.

_Lord Flumm._ There, Lady Selina, so much for your philosophic friend.
Poor Turnstile! What a business he _has_ made of it. Here is the
“Times,” with the report of the Shoreditch election meeting. Turnstile
has no chance. The Scotchmen coalesce; Highway none of us can think
of; and Smooth and MacLeech walk over the ground in triumph; and then,
the Presidency of Manufactures, the _very_ appointment for which poor
Turnstile was fitted (and, to do the poor devil justice, he could have
filled it well), is given to MacLeech, a Scotch hanger on, or distant
cousin of Smooth’s, and with the old salary, in spite of all that Hume
could say against it.—Bravo! Reform, and the Whigs for ever!—We Tories
could not have done the business in a better style.

_Enter a Footman._

_Footman._ Mr. Turnstile, my Lady, sends up his card.

_Lady Flumm._ Oh, not at home! And Sleek, put a memorandum in the
visiting-book, that we are “out of town,” whenever Mr. Turnstile calls.


SCENE XII.—TURNSTILE’S _Parlour. Night._ TURNSTILE _alone_.

_Turnstile._ Then all is up. What a fool have I been to embark upon
this sea of trouble! Two years of trifling and lost time; while others
have been making discoveries and adding to their reputation. Those
_rascal_ Whigs, my blood boils to think of them. I can forgive the
Shoreditch {291} people—the greasy, vulgar, money-getting beasts;—but
my friends, the men of principle—— (_Getting up and walking about._)

Is it still too late to return? (_Looking round upon his books and
instruments._) There you are, my old friends, whom I _have_ treated
rather ungratefully. What a scene at that cursed meeting! Highway’s
bullying; and the baseness of Smooth; the sleek, sly, steering of that
knave MacLeech; and yet they _must_ succeed. There’s no help for it.
I _am_ fairly beaten—thrown overboard, with not a leg to stand upon;
and all I have to do is to go to bed now, to sleep off this fever; and
to-morrow, take leave of politics, and try to be myself once more.

END OF THE EXTRACTS.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Note._—The reader will doubtlessly have already discovered that
“Byeways,” with the other _dramatis personæ_ of this squib, are living
characters not unknown in fashionable and political circles. In a
future edition, if it can be done without offence, I may perhaps be
induced to present them to the public without their masks and buskins.

{292}




CHAPTER XXIII.

EXPERIENCE AT COURTS.


 Pension to Dr. Dalton — Inhabitants of Manchester subscribe for a
 Statue by Chantrey — The Author proposed that he should appear at a
 Levee — Various difficulties suggested and removed — The Chancellor
 approves and offers to present him — Mentions it to King William IV.
 — Difficulties occur — Dalton as a Quaker could not wear a Sword —
 Answer, he may go in his Robes as Doctor of Laws of Oxford — As a
 Quaker he could not wear Scarlet Robes — Answer, Dalton is afflicted
 with Colour-blindness — Crimson to him is dirt-colour — Dr. Dalton
 breakfasts with the Author — First Rehearsal — Second Rehearsal at Mr.
 Wood’s — At the Levee — The Church in danger — Courtiers jealous of
 the Quaker — Conversation at Court sometimes interesting, occasionally
 profitable.

The following letter was addressed by me to Dr. Henry, the biographer
of Dalton, in reply to inquiries respecting the part I had taken in
procuring a pension for that distinguished philosopher. It was printed
in the “Life of Dalton,” and is now reprinted from its illustration of
the subject of this chapter:—


“MY DEAR SIR,—I have now examined my papers, as far as I can, to find
any traces of Dalton amongst them. I find only two letters, of which I
send you copies.

“I well remember taking a great interest in Dalton’s pension, as you
will see by several passages in ‘The Decline of Science,’ pp. 20 and
22, and note; but I have no recollection of any of the circumstances,
or through what channel it was applied for. {293}

“I find several letters of that date from Mr. Wood,[41] and it appears
from them that I went with him to Poulett Thomson;[42] but I only
gather this fact from those letters. I send them in the enclosure, as
they may be of use. You can return them at your own convenience.

〈STATUE OF DALTON.〉

“When the inhabitants of Manchester had subscribed 2,000 _l._ for
a statue of Dalton, he came up to London, and was the guest of Mr.
Wood. He sat to Chantrey for the statue. I consequently saw much of my
friend. It occurred to me that, as his townsmen were having a statue
of him—as the University of Oxford had given him the honorary degree
of Doctor of Laws—and as the Government had given him a pension—if it
were not incompatible with his feelings, it would be a fit thing that
he should be presented at a levee. It appeared to me that if William
the Fourth were informed of it, it would afford him an opportunity
of saying a few words to the venerable philosopher, which would be
gratifying to the inhabitants of Manchester, the University of Oxford,
and the world of science.

     [41] Member for South Lancashire.

     [42] Afterwards Lord Sydenham.

“Accordingly I wrote a note to Mr. Wood, suggesting the idea, and
proposing that he should ascertain from Doctor Dalton whether it would
be unpleasant to him to go through the usual forms.

“Dalton not objecting, my note was sent on by Mr. Wood to Lord
Brougham, who at that time was Lord Chancellor. He approved highly of
the plan, and offered to present Doctor Dalton. He also mentioned the
circumstance to the King.

“I had had some conversation with Mr. Wood upon the subject, when
several difficulties presented themselves to him. Doctor Dalton, as a
Quaker, could not appear in a {294} court-dress, because he must wear
a sword. To this I replied, that being aware of the difficulty, I had
proposed to let him wear the robes of a Doctor of Laws of Oxford.

“Mr. Wood remarked, that those robes being _scarlet_, they were not of
a colour admissible by Quakers.

“To this I replied, that Doctor Dalton had a kind of
_colour-blindness_, and that all red colours appeared to him to be
the colour of dirt. Besides, I had found that our friend entertained
very reasonable views of such mere matters of form. The velvet cap
of the Doctor again was not an obstacle, as he was informed that it
was usually held in the hand, and was rather a mark of office than a
covering for the head.

“These difficulties being surmounted, Doctor Dalton came one morning to
breakfast with me. We were alone; and after breakfast he went up with
me into the drawing-room, in order to see the Difference Engine. After
we had made several series of calculations, he recollected that he had
in his pocket a note to me from Mr. Wood. On hastily looking it over, I
found that it was to announce to me that our friend acquiesced in the
plan.

〈FIRST REHEARSAL OF A LEVEE.〉

“I now mentioned the forms usual at a levee, and placing several chairs
in order to represent the various officers in the Presence-chamber, I
put Doctor Dalton in the middle of the circle to represent the King.
I then told my friend that I should represent a greater man than the
King; that I intended to personate Doctor Dalton, and would re-enter at
the further door, go round the circle, make my obeisance to the King,
and thus show him the kind of ceremony at which he was to assist.

“On passing the third chair from the King’s, I put my card on the
chair, at the same time informing Doctor Dalton {295} that this was
the post of a Lord in Waiting, who takes the cards, and gives them to
the next officer, who announces them to the King.

“On passing the philosopher I kissed his hand, and then passing round
the rest of the circle of chairs, I thus gave him his first lesson as a
courtier.

“It was arranged that I should take Doctor Dalton with me to the levee,
and put on his card, ‘Doctor Dalton, presented by the Lord Chancellor.’

〈FULL DRESS REHEARSAL OF LEVEE.〉

“When the morning arrived I went to Mr. Wood’s residence, and found
Doctor Dalton quite ready for the expedition. In order to render the
chief actor perfect in his part, we again had a rehearsal; Mrs. Wood
personating the King, and the rest of the family, with the assistance
of sundry chairs and stools, representing the great Officers of State.
I then entered the room, preceding my excellent friend, who followed
his instructions as perfectly as if he had been repeating an experiment.

“Being now quite satisfied with the performance, we drove off to St.
James’s. The robes of a Doctor of Laws are rarely made use of, except
at a University Address: consequently Dr. Dalton’s costume attracted
much attention, and compelled me to gratify the curiosity of many of
my friends, by explaining who he was. The prevailing opinion had been
that he was the Mayor of some corporate town come up to get knighted.
I informed my inquirers, that he was a much more eminent person than
any Mayor of any city, and having won for himself a name which would
survive when orders of knighthood should be forgotten, he had no
ambition to be knighted.

〈THE CHURCH IN DANGER.〉

“At a short distance from the Presence-chamber, I observed close before
me several dignitaries of the church, in {296} the full radiance of
their vast lawn sleeves. The Bishop of Gloucester,[43] who was nearest,
accidentally turning his head, I recognized a face long familiar to me
from its cordiality and kindness. A few words were interchanged between
us, and also by myself with the rest of the party, the remotest of
whom, if I remember rightly, was the Archbishop of Dublin. The dress
of my friend seemed to strike the Bishop’s attention; but the quiet
costume of the Quaker beneath his scarlet robe was entirely unnoticed.
I therefore confided to the Bishop of Gloucester the fact that I had
a Quaker by my side, at the same time assuring him that my peaceful
and philosophic friend was very far from meditating any injury to the
Church. The effect was electric upon the whole party; episcopal eyes
had never yet beheld such a spectacle in such society, and I fear,
notwithstanding my assurance, some portion of the establishment thought
the Church really in danger.

“We now entered the Presence-chamber, and having passed the King, I
retired very slowly, in order that I might observe events. Doctor
Dalton having kissed hands, the King asked him several questions, all
which the philosopher duly answered, and then moved on in proper order
to join me. This reception, however, had not passed with sufficient
rapidity to escape jealousy, for I heard one officer say to another,
‘Who the d—l is that fellow whom the King keeps talking to so long?’

     [43] Dr. Monk.

〈INTERESTING CONFIDENCES AT A LEVEE.〉

“Conversations at Courts are not always thought to be the most
interesting things in the world; although, doubtless, they must be
so to the parties engaged in them. In the midst of crowded levees
and drawing-rooms, one is often compelled to become the confidant of
strangers around us. {297} The amusement derived from this source
predominates over the instruction. I have heard much anxious inquiry
as to certain pieces of clerical preferment—who is to have certain
military or colonial commands, and what promotions will take place from
the consequent vacancies?—many political queries have been proposed,
and how ‘the party’ would act in certain contingent cases? I once heard
a gentleman receive at a levee the first announcement of a legacy;
on another occasion, on my return from the Continent, I was myself
informed at a levee of a similarly gratifying, and to me entirely
unexpected, event.

“Doctor Dalton having now passed through the formal part of a levee,
had a better opportunity of viewing the details. He inquired the names
of several of the portraits, and I took the opportunity of pointing out
to him many of the living celebrities.

“We then returned to Mr. Wood’s residence, and the whole party were
highly gratified at the success of the undertaking.

 “I am, my dear Sir, very truly yours,
 “C. BABBAGE.

 “_Dorset Street, Manchester Square,
     February 7, 1854._”

{298}




CHAPTER XXIV.

EXPERIENCE AT COURTS.


 The Author invited to a Meeting at Turin of the Philosophers of Italy,
 1840 — The King, Charles Albert — Reflections on Shyness — Question of
 Dress — Electric Telegraph — Theory of Storms — Remark of an Italian
 Friend in the evening at the Opera — Various Instruments taken to the
 Palace, and shown to the young Princes — The Queen being absent — The
 reason why — The young Princes did great credit to their Governor
 — The General highly gratified — The Philosopher proposes another
 difficult question — It is referred to the King himself — An audience
 is granted to ask the King’s permission to present the woven Silk
 Engraving of Jacquard to Her Majesty — Singular but Comic Scene — The
 final Capture of the Butterflies — Visit to Raconigi — The Vintage.

About a quarter of a century ago the Court of Turin had the reputation
of being the most formal and punctilious of any in Europe. It was dull
to the diplomatic officials, who were doomed like planets to circulate
around it, though not without interest to the inquiring traveller,
whose orbit, like that of a comet, passed through its atmosphere only
at distant intervals.

In 1840 I received a gratifying invitation to meet the _élite_ of the
science of Italy at Turin. On my arrival I immediately took measures to
pay my respects in the usual manner to the sovereign of the country.
Having inquired of a nobleman[44] high in the confidence of the King,
when there {299} would occur a levee, in order that I might have the
honour of being presented, I was informed that his Majesty was aware of
my arrival, and would receive me at a private audience. Two days after
I had a formal visit from Count Alessandro Saluzzo to inform me that
the King would receive me the next day at two o’clock.

     [44] Conte D. Alessandro Saluzzo di Monesiglio, Grande di Corona,
     Presid. della sexiare dell’ interno nel consiglio di stato, &c.

〈THE COURT OF TURIN IN 1840.〉

I then made inquiries as to the usual dress, and found that a court
dress was not considered essential on such occasions, especially for a
foreigner, and that I might with perfect propriety go in plain clothes.
I was glad to avail myself of this permission; but in order to prevent
any misapprehension, I drove up to the palace about a quarter of an
hour before the appointed time, and called upon General Cesare de
Salluce,[45] the governor of the two young princes, the present King of
Italy and the late Duke of Genoa, then respectively about eighteen and
seventeen years of age.

The General kindly offered to accompany me to the antechamber. In the
course of our conversation I took an opportunity of mentioning that,
having been informed I might appear in plain clothes, I had thought it
most respectful to his sovereign to wear the same dress I had worn a
few days before I left England, when I had the honour of being invited
to the first party[46] given by a subject to my own sovereign.

     [45] Saluzzo di Monesiglio, Car. Cesare, Luogoten, Gen., Gran
     Mastro d’Artiglieria et Governatore de Reali Principi, &c.; the
     younger brother of the Count Alexander.

     [46] The déjeûné at Wimbledon Park, the residence of the late Duke
     of Somerset.

I had already been informed that the King, Charles Albert, took a great
interest in the success of the meeting; that he was a very good man,
but remarkably shy; and that he probably would not detain me more than
perhaps five minutes.

I had myself experienced the misery of that affliction, and {300} felt
how much more painful it must inevitably become when it fell to the lot
of a person placed in the most exalted rank.

〈RECEPTION OF THE PHILOSOPHER.〉

On entering the ante-room I found a number of the most distinguished
people of the country waiting for audience, the king at that time being
occupied, as I was informed, with one of his ministers. On his exit the
master of the ceremonies announced that his Majesty would receive me.

I then entered the royal reception-room, and was presented to the
King. He was a remarkably tall person, dressed in military costume,
having a very peculiar expression of countenance, which I was at a loss
how immediately to interpret. The King invited me to sit down, and I
followed his Majesty to a large bay-window, where we immediately sat
down on two stools opposite to each other.

The King expressed his satisfaction that I had come from so
considerable a distance to assist at the councils of the men of science
then assembling in his own capital. Of course I replied by remarking
that the advancement of the sciences contributed to the material as
well as to the intellectual progress of every nation, and that when a
sovereign, intimately convinced of this truth, took measures for the
extension and diffusion of knowledge, it was the duty of all those
engaged in its cultivation respectfully to assist as far as their
individual circumstances permitted.

After a short pause, the King put some question which I do not
remember, except that it was one of the conventional topics of society:
perhaps it might have related to my journey. I now felt that unless
I could raise some question of curiosity in his Majesty’s mind, to
overcome his natural reserve, the interview would soon terminate
precisely in the manner predicted. I therefore, in replying to this
question, {301} contrived to introduce a remarkable fact relative to
the electric telegraph. I soon perceived that it had taken hold of the
King’s imagination, and the next question confirmed my view. “For what
purposes,” said the King, “will the electric telegraph become useful?”

I must here request the reader to go back in his memory to the state
of our knowledge in 1840, when electricity and other subjects, now of
every-day application, were just commencing their then eccentric but
now regulated course.

〈THEORY OF STORMS—ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH.〉

The King put the very question I had wished. Carefully observing his
countenance, I felt that I was advancing in a tract in which he was
interested. At each pause the proper question was suggested, and at
last I pointed out the probability that, by means of the electric
telegraphs, his Majesty’s fleet might receive warning of coming storms.
This led to the new theory of storms, about which the king was very
curious. By degrees I endeavoured to make it clear. I cited, as an
illustration, a storm which had occurred but a short time before I left
England. The damage done by it at Liverpool was very great, and at
Glasgow immense. On one large property in the west coast of Scotland
thirty thousand timber-trees had been thrown down.

I then explained that by subsequent inquiries it had been found that
this storm arose from the overlapping of two circular whirlwinds,
one of them coming up from the Atlantic bodily at the rate of twenty
miles an hour, the other passing at the rate of twelve miles an hour,
in a north-westerly direction, to Glasgow, where they coalesced, and
destroyed property to the value of above half a million sterling. I
added that if there had been electric communication between Genoa and
a few other places the people of Glasgow might have had information of
one of those storms twenty-four hours previously to its {302} arrival,
and could then have taken effective measures for the security of much
of their shipping.

〈THE PHILOSOPHER TROUBLED WITH A CONSCIENCE.〉

During this conversation I had felt rather uneasy at occupying the
king’s time so long when several of his own ministers were waiting in
his ante-room for an audience, perhaps upon important business. Urged
by this truly conscientious motive, I committed a _gaucherie_ of the
deepest water—I half rose from my stool to take leave of his Majesty.
The King, as well he might, lifted up both his hands and then expressed
the greatest interest in the continuance of the subject.

After a conversation of about five-and-twenty minutes the King rose,
and, walking with me to the door, I made my bow. The King then held out
his hand.

Here might have arisen a puzzling question, what I ought to have done;
but previously to the interview I had taken the precaution of inquiring
of one of my Sardinian friends what were the usual forms, and whether
it was customary to kiss hands on being presented to the sovereign. The
answer was in the negative. The ceremony of kissing hands, he informed
me, never took place except when a native subject was appointed to some
very high office.

I therefore immediately perceived that the King had done me the honour
of adopting the salutation of my own country. Under these circumstances
I shook hands as an Englishman does, and then, bowing profoundly,
retired.

In the course of the evening of that day, being at the opera, I visited
the box of one of my Italian acquaintances. A great friend of mine,
also an Italian, who had been dining at the palace, came in soon
after. He said to me, “What an extraordinary person you are! You have
perfectly fascinated our King, who has done nothing but talk of you and
the things you have told him during the whole of dinner-time.” {303}

I admit I felt great satisfaction at this announcement of the complete
success of my daring experiment. It assured me that my unusual
deviation from the routine of a Court was fully justified by the
interest the matter communicated had awakened in the King’s mind.

〈EXHIBITS VARIOUS INSTRUMENTS.〉

I had brought with me to Turin several models and various instruments
connected with science and mechanical art, which of course had been
examined by many of my scientific and personal friends. Unfortunately,
on two occasions, when General de Salluce, who was much my senior
in years, called upon me, I happened to be absent from the house.
Knowing how fully his time was occupied by his illustrious pupils, I
much regretted that I had not been at home when he called, and during
one of my visits at the palace I offered to bring with me, on another
occasion, some of the things I thought might be most interesting.

The General could not think of giving me that trouble, and at first
very courteously declined the proposal. But after a moment or two he
said, “On second thoughts, I will accept your kind offer, because I
think it may be useful to my young pupils.”

On the morning proposed I drove up to the palace with some boxes
containing the various apparatus, and was immediately shown into a
large room nearly at the top of the palace. After opening the boxes
and giving the General a glance at the various articles, I remarked
that several of them were interesting to ladies, and that possibly the
Queen, if made acquainted with it, might like to accompany her sons;
in which case it would, perhaps, be more convenient for her Majesty if
they were placed in a lower room of the palace.

〈THE QUEEN UNABLE TO COME.〉

The idea appeared a happy one; the General was much {304} pleased at
it, and said he would go immediately and take her Majesty’s pleasure
on the subject. After considerable delay General de Salluce returned,
evidently much disappointed, and said he was commanded by the Queen to
thank me for the attention, and to express her Majesty’s regret that
she was prevented by an engagement from accompanying the young Princes.

When everything was arranged, and the hour appointed had arrived, the
young Princes, accompanied by, I presume, various members of the royal
household, and their Governor, arrived. Altogether there might have
been about a dozen or fourteen persons of both sexes present.

I pointed out the use and structure of most of the instruments. Some
objects belonged to mechanical art, such as patent locks and tools; a
few were related to the Fine Arts.

The whole party seemed much pleased; the young Princes particularly
took a great interest in them, whereat the General was highly
gratified. Before his young pupils retired, I took the General aside
and inquired whether it was consistent with their customs that I
should present to each of his two pupils one of the various (but in
a pecuniary sense trifling) articles which they had examined. I was
glad to find that I might be permitted to leave behind me two little
souvenirs of a most agreeable day.

The whole party, with the exception of General de Salluce, had now
retired. We walked up and down the room together for some time,
conversing upon the success of the meeting. My excellent friend was
justly delighted with the intelligent inquiries made by his pupils.

I thought I now perceived a favourable opportunity of ascertaining the
cause of the Queen’s absence.

After some kind expression towards me, I suddenly stopped, {305} and,
looking inquiringly into his countenance, said, “Now, General, just
before this very agreeable party met you went to invite the Queen, and
you returned and then told me the _official_. Now pray do tell me the
_real_.”

〈THE REASON EXPLAINED.〉

The surprise of the General was certainly great, but, with a most
agreeable smile, he immediately consented.

It appears that its history was thus. The General went to the Queen’s
apartments and asked, through her lord-in-waiting, to be permitted to
see her Majesty. This request was immediately granted. The General then
informed the Queen that amongst the things her sons were going to see
were several which might, perhaps, interest her Majesty. The Queen said
she would accompany her sons, and then directed her own lord-in-waiting
to go and ask the King’s permission.

Accordingly the Queen’s lord-in-waiting went to the King’s apartments,
and found that he was sitting in Council. He proceeded to the ante-room
of the Council-chamber, and there found the King’s lord-in-waiting, to
whom he communicated his mission.

The King’s lord-in-waiting then informed the Queen’s lord-in-waiting
that important news[47] had just arrived, and that a special
council had been called; that of course he was ready to convey the
Queen’s message immediately, but he suggested whether, under these
circumstances, the Queen would wish it.

     [47] The Syrian question.

The Queen’s lord-in-waiting now returned to her Majesty for further
instructions.

Of course the Queen, like a good wife, at once gave up the intention
of accompanying her sons in their interview with the philosopher. I
felt much regret at this disappointment. The Queen of Sardinia was the
sister of the Grand Duke of Tuscany (Leopold II.), from whom I had,
many years before, {306} when under severe affliction from the loss
of a large portion of my family, received the most kind and gratifying
attention.

〈THE WOVEN PORTRAIT.〉

On my road to Turin I had passed a few days at Lyons, in order to
examine the silk manufacture. I was specially anxious to see the loom
in which that admirable specimen of fine art, the portrait of Jacquard,
was woven. I passed many hours in watching its progress.

I possessed one copy, which had been kindly given to me by a friend;
but as I had proposed to visit Florence after the meeting at Turin, I
wished to procure another copy to present to the Grand Duke of Tuscany.

These beautiful productions were not made for sale; but, as a favour, I
was allowed to purchase one of them.

Whilst the General was giving me this illustration of Court etiquette,
it occurred to me that the silken engraving would be an appropriate
offering to a lady.

I therefore again asked my friend whether, consistently with the usages
of the country, I might be permitted to offer the engraving to the
Queen.

The sudden change of his countenance from gay to grave was very
remarkable. I feared I had proposed something of the most unusual kind.
The General then slowly replied, “I will take the King’s pleasure on
the subject.”

Two days after the General informed me that the King would give me an
audience the next day, in order that I might ask permission to present
the woven engraving to the Queen.

Accordingly, at the appointed hour, I went to the palace with the large
cartoon-case containing the portrait of Jacquard.[48] On being admitted
into the presence of the King, I placed the case upon a sofa, and,
opening it carefully, {307} unfolded the woven portrait from a crowd
of sheets of silver paper of the most ethereal lightness. I then placed
it in his Majesty’s hands. The King examined it minutely on both sides,
inquired about its structure, and appeared much pleased at the sight.

     [48] The dimensions were 2 ft. 8 in. by 2 ft. 2 in.

〈A FLIGHT OF BUTTERFLIES.〉

I now went over to replace the engraving in its travelling-carriage.
The instant it approached its paper case a multitude of sheets of
silver paper were disturbed in their snug repose, and forthwith flew up
into the air. I made many ineffectual efforts to catch these runaways.
The King most condescendingly came to my assistance, took the portrait
out of my hands, and endeavoured himself to replace it in its nest,
whilst I was attempting to catch the flying covey.

But these volatile papers had no proper respect even for royalty. The
quires of silver paper which had remained in the case now came out in
all directions, whether to do honour to the King by rising to receive
him, or to recall their flighty sisters to their deserted couch I know
not; but somehow or other both the King and myself were on the floor
upon our knees, having secured some few of the fallen angels, whilst a
cloud of others, still on the wing, continually eluded our grasp.

At last I gave up the idea of grabbing at the flying sheets, and
confined my attention to seizing on the fallen ones. While still on
my knees, I suddenly felt an obstacle presented to my right foot.
On looking round I perceived that the heel of royalty had come into
contact with the toe of philosophy.

A comic yet kindly smile beamed upon the countenance of the King,
whilst an irrepressible but not irreverent one, lightened up my own.

The whole army of butterflies being at last captured, and {308} the
engraving replaced, the King entered into a conversation with me upon
various subjects.

〈THE VINTAGE AT RACONIGI.〉

The processes of wine-making then became the subject of conversation.
I believe I may have observed incidentally in reply to some question,
that my information was only derived from books, as I had not had an
opportunity of seeing any of its processes. About a week after this,
one of the officers of the household called upon me, and told me that
the vintage of Raconigi, one of the King’s beautiful domains, at about
a dozen miles from Turin, would commence in the following week; that
he was commanded by his Majesty, in case I should wish to examine the
processes, to inform me of the circumstance, and to accompany me for
the purpose of explaining them—a mission, he was so kind as to add,
which would personally be highly gratifying to himself.

I willingly accepted this most agreeable proposition, and the day was
fixed upon. At an early hour my friend was at my door in one of the
royal carriages. The weather was magnificent, and we drove through a
beautiful country.

On arriving at the vineyard we found several of the processes in full
operation. Each in succession was explained; and after spending a
most instructive morning, we found an excellent dinner prepared for
us at the palace, where I had the pleasure of meeting General ——, who
presided, and who had spent several years in England.

On our return in the evening I observed a dragoon apparently
accompanying the carriage. At first I took it for granted that his
road happened to be the same as ours; but after a mile or two had been
passed over, seeing him still close to us, I inquired of my companion
if he knew whither the soldier was going. It then appeared that he had
been sent by the General as a complimentary escort. {309}

However gratified I felt by this attention, I still was quite
uncomfortable at the idea of having a man galloping after our carriage
for ten miles. I therefore appealed to my friend to suspend this
unnecessary loss of _vis viva_. With some reluctance the dragoon was
exempted from further attendance upon the philosopher.

Shortly before I left Turin, one of my Italian friends remarked, with
evident feelings of pride and satisfaction, upon the attentions I had
received from his sovereign. “The King, he observed, has done three
things for you, which are very unusual—

“He has shaken hands with you.

“He has asked you to sit down at an audience.

“He has permitted you to make a present to the Queen. This last,” he
added, “is the rarest of all.”

       *       *       *       *       *


〈AUDIENCE TO TAKE LEAVE.〉

Two days before my departure from Turin, I had an audience, to take
leave of his Majesty. The King inquired in what direction I intended
to travel homeward. I mentioned my intention of taking the mail to
Geneva, because it traversed a most remarkable suspension-bridge over a
deep ravine. The span of this bridge, which is named, after the king,
Pont Charles Albert, is six hundred French feet, and the depth of the
chasm over which it is suspended is also six hundred French feet. The
King immediately opened a drawer, and, taking out a small bronze medal,
struck to celebrate the opening of the bridge, presented it to me.

I now took the opportunity of expressing to the King my gratitude for
the many and kind attentions I had received from his subjects, and more
especially for the honour he had himself recently done me by sending
one of his ministers officially to convey to me his Majesty’s high
approbation of my conduct. {310} The King then entered upon another
course of inquiry, more immediately connected with his government.
I had on several occasions, when a favourable opportunity presented
itself, drawn the King’s attention to the doctrine of free trade—a
subject on which he evidently felt a great desire to be informed. The
questions put to me, though necessary for assisting the King to arrive
at right conclusions, were of such a nature that I considered them
confidential, and therefore forbear to relate them.

Two days after I started by the mail for Geneva. I shared the Coupé
of the Malle Poste with the courier, a very intelligent officer. On
mentioning my wish to see the celebrated bridge, he informed me that
he was already aware of my wishes, and that he had received orders
to detain the mail a quarter of an hour, that I might have a good
opportunity of seeing it.

〈THE PONT CHARLES ALBERT.〉

The scene which presented itself on my approach to the Pont Charles
Albert was singularly grand. We had been driving for some time along
a road skirting the edge of an immense chasm, six hundred and forty
English feet in depth. The opposite side was hid from our view by
a mist which hung over it. At the next bend in the road a portion
of the bridge suddenly became visible to us. It appeared to spring
from a massive pier on which the chains on our side of the ravine
rested. The bridge itself was nearly level, and was visible for about
three-quarters only of its length as it traversed the valley far
beneath it. The termination of the ascending portion of the chains on
the further pier, and that part of the bridge itself, were completely
concealed by the mist. It really seemed like a bridge springing from
a lofty cliff spanning the sea beneath and suspended on the distant
clouds. When we had descended from the mail at the {311} commencement,
we had directed the postilions to drive slowly across the bridge, then
about a third of a mile distant from us.

〈ITS MYSTIC SCENERY.〉

We were singularly favoured by circumstances. We saw the carriage which
had just left us apparently crossing the bridge, then penetrating into
the clouds, and finally becoming entirely lost to our view. At the same
time the dissolving mist in our own immediate neighbourhood began to
allow us to perceive the depth of the valley beneath, and at last even
the little wandering brook, which looked like a thread of silver at its
bottom.

The sun now burst out from behind a range of clouds, which had obscured
it. Its warm rays speedily dissipated the mist, illuminated the dark
gulf at our own side, and discovered to us the mail on terra firma on
the opposite side of the chasm waiting to convey us to our destination.

On our arrival at Annecy, my thoughtful companion informed me that
the mail would wait five-and-forty minutes. He suggested, as I was
not in good health, that I should immediately on my arrival get into
bed, whilst he would order tea, or supper, or any refreshment I might
prefer, and that he would be answerable for calling me at the proper
time to enable me to get comfortably whatever I might require, and be
ready to start again with the mail.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have frequently attempted to assign in my own mind the reasons of the
singularly favourable reception I met with from the King of Sardinia.
The reputation arising from the Analytical Engine could scarcely have
produced that effect. The position of a sovereign is a very exceptional
one. He is surrounded by persons each of whom has always one or more
objects to gain. It is scarcely within the limits of possibility {312}
that he can have a real friend, or if he have that rarest commodity,
that he can know the fact.

〈ELEMENTS OF MY SUCCESS AT TURIN.〉

A certain amount of distrust must therefore almost always exist in his
mind. But this habitual distrust applies less to foreigners than to his
own subjects. The comet which passes through the thick atmosphere of
a Court may be temporarily disturbed in its path though it may never
revisit it again.

Perhaps the first element of my success was, that having been the
victim of shyness in early life, I could sympathise with those who
still suffered under that painful complaint.

Another reason may have been, that I never stated more than I really
knew. This is, I believe, a very unusual practice in Courts of _every_
kind; and when it happens to be obviously sincere, it commands great
influence.

There might be yet another reason:—it was well known that I had nothing
to ask for—to expect—or to desire.

{313}




CHAPTER XXV.

RAILWAYS.


 Opening of Manchester and Liverpool Railway — Death of Mr. Huskisson
 — Plate-glass Manufactory — Mode of separating Engine from Train —
 Broad-gauge Question — Experimental Carriage — Measure the Force of
 Traction, the Vertical, Lateral, and End Shake of Carriage, also its
 Velocity by Chronometer — Fortunate Escape from meeting on the same
 Line Brunel on another Engine — Sailed across the Hanwell Viaduct in
 a Waggon without Steam — Meeting of British Association at Newcastle
 — George Stephenson — Dr. Lardner — Suggestions for greater Safety on
 Railroads — George Stephenson’s Opinion of the Gauges — Railways at
 National Exhibitions.

At the commencement of the railway system I naturally took a great
interest in the subject, from its bearings upon mechanism as well as
upon political economy.

I accompanied Mr. Woolryche Whitmore, the member for Bridgenorth, to
Liverpool, at the opening of the Manchester and Liverpool Railway. The
morning previous to the opening, we met Mr. Huskisson at the Exchange,
and my friend introduced me to him. The next day the numerous trains
started with their heavy load of travellers. All went on pleasantly
until we reached Parkside, near Newton. During the time the engines
which drew us were taking in their water and their fuel, many of the
passengers got out and recognized their friends in other trains.

At a certain signal all resumed their seats; but we had {314} not
proceeded a mile before the whole of our trains came to a stand-still
without any ostensible cause. After some time spent in various
conjectures, a single engine almost flew past us on the other line of
rail, drawing with it the ornamental car which the Duke of Wellington
and other officials had so recently occupied. Instead of its former
numerous company it appeared to convey only two, or at most three,
persons; but the rapidity of its flight prevented any close observation
of the passengers.

〈FATAL ACCIDENT TO MR. HUSKISSON.〉

A certain amount of alarm now began to pervade the trains, and various
conjectures were afloat of some serious accident. After a while Mr.
Whitmore and myself got out of our carriage and hastened back towards
the halting place. At a little distance before us, in the middle of
the railway, stood the Duke of Wellington, Sir Robert Peel, and the
Boroughreeve of Manchester, discussing the course to be pursued in
consequence of the dreadful accident which had befallen Mr. Huskisson,
whom I had seen but a few minutes before standing at the door of the
carriage conversing with the Duke of Wellington. The Duke was anxious
that the whole party should return to Liverpool; but the chief officer
of Manchester pressed upon them the necessity of continuing the
journey, stating that if it were given up he could not be answerable
for the safety of the town.

It was at last mournfully resolved to continue our course to
Manchester, where a luncheon had been prepared for us; but to give up
all the ceremonial, and to return as soon as we could to Liverpool.

For several miles before we reached our destination the sides of
the railroad were crowded by a highly-excited populace shouting and
yelling. I feared each moment that some still greater sacrifice of life
might occur from the people {315} madly attempting to stop by their
feeble arms the momentum of our enormous trains.

〈GREAT DELAY—RUMOURS OF DISASTER.〉

Having rapidly taken what refreshment was necessary, we waited with
anxiety for our trains; but hour after hour passed away before they
were able to start. The cause of this delay arose thus. The Duke of
Wellington was the guest of the Earl of Wilton, the nearest station to
whose residence was almost half way between Manchester and Liverpool.
A train therefore was ordered to convey the party to Heaton House.
Unfortunately, our engines had necessarily gone a considerable distance
upon that line to get their supply of water, and were thus cut off by
the train conveying the Duke, from returning direct to Manchester.

There were not yet at this early period of railway history any sidings
to allow of a passage, or any crossing to enable the engines to get
upon the other line of rails. Under these circumstances the drivers
took the shortest course open to them. Having taken in their water,
they pushed on as fast as they could to a crossing at a short distance
from Liverpool. They backed into the other line of rail, and thus
returned to Manchester to pick up their trains.

In the meantime the vague rumour of some great disaster had reached
Liverpool. Thousands of persons, many of whom had friends and relatives
in the excursion trains, were congregated on the bridges and at the
railway station, anxious to learn news of their friends and relatives.

About five o’clock in the evening they perceived at a distance
half-a-dozen engines without any carriages, rushing furiously towards
them—suddenly checking their speed—then backing into the other line of
rail—again flying away towards Manchester, without giving any signs
or explanation of the mystery in which many of them were so deeply
interested. {316}

It is difficult to estimate the amount of anxiety and misery which
was thus unwillingly but inevitably caused amongst all those who had
friends, connections, or relatives in the missing trains.

When these engines returned to Manchester, our trains were
unfortunately connected together, and three engines were attached to
the front of each group of three trains.

This arrangement considerably diminished their joint power of traction.
But another source of delay arose: the couplings which were strong
enough when connecting an engine and its train were not sufficiently
strong when three engines were coupled together. The consequence was
that there were frequent fractures of our couplings and thus great
delays arose.

About half-past eight in the evening I reached the great building in
which we were to have dined. Its tables were half filled with separate
groups of three or four people each, who being strangers in Liverpool,
had no other resource than to use it as a kind of coffee-room in which
to get a hasty meal, and retire.

〈PLATE-GLASS MANUFACTORY.〉

The next morning I went over to see the plate-glass manufactory at
about ten miles from Liverpool.

On my arrival I found, to my great disappointment, that there were
orders that nobody should be admitted on that day, as the Duke of
Wellington and a large party were coming over from Lord Wilton’s. This
was the only day at my disposal, and it wanted nearly an hour to the
time appointed: so I asked to be permitted to see the works, promising
to retire as soon as the Earl of Wilton’s party arrived. I added
incidentally that I was not entirely unknown to the Duke of Wellington.

On the arrival of the party I quietly made my retreat {317}
unobserved, and had just entered the carriage which had conveyed me
from Liverpool, when a messenger arrived with the Duke’s compliments,
hoping that I would join his party. I willingly accepted the
invitation; the Duke presented me to each of his friends, and I had
the advantage of having another survey of the works. This was my first
acquaintance with the late Lady Wilton, who afterwards called on me
with the Duke of Wellington, and put that sagacious question relative
to the Difference Engine which I have mentioned in another part of this
volume. Amongst the party were Mr. and Mrs. Arbuthnot, with the former
of whom I afterwards had several interesting discussions relative to
subjects connected with the ninth “Bridgewater Treatise.”

A few days after, I met at dinner a large party at the house of one of
the great Liverpool merchants. Amongst them were several officers of
the new railway, and almost all the party were more or less interested
in its success.

In these circumstances the conversation very naturally turned upon
the new mode of locomotion. Its various difficulties and dangers were
suggested and discussed. Amongst others, it was observed that obstacles
might be placed upon the rail, either accidentally or by design, which
might produce expensive and fatal effects.

〈ON PREVENTING RAILWAY ACCIDENTS.〉

To prevent the occurrence of these evils, I suggested two remedies.

1st. That every engine should have just in advance of each of its front
wheels a powerful framing, supporting a strong piece of plate-iron,
descending within an inch or two of the upper face of the rail. These
iron plates should be fixed at an angle of 45° with the line of rail,
and also at the same angle with respect to the horizon. Their shape
would be something like that of ploughshares, and their effect would
{318} be to pitch any obstacle obliquely off the rail unless its
heavier portion were between the rails.

Some time after, a strong vertical bar of iron was placed in front of
the wheels of every engine. The objection to this is, that it has a
tendency to throw the obstacle straight forward upon another part of
the rail.

2nd. The second suggestion I made, was to place in front of each engine
a strong leather apron attached to a powerful iron bar, projecting five
or six feet in front of the engine and about a foot above the ballast.
The effect of this would be, that any animal straying over the railway
would be pitched into this apron, probably having its legs broken, but
forming no impediment to the progress of the train.

〈VARIOUS PLANS PROPOSED.〉

I have been informed that this contrivance has been adopted in America,
where the railroads, being unenclosed, are subject to frequent
obstruction from cattle. If used on enclosed roads, it still might
occasionally save the lives of incautious persons, although possibly at
the expense of broken limbs.

Another question discussed at this party was, whether, if an engine
went off the rail, it would be possible to separate it from the train
before it had dragged the latter after it. I took out my pencil and
sketched upon a card a simple method of accomplishing that object. It
passed round the table, and one of the party suggested that I should
communicate the plan to the Directors of the railway.

My answer was, that having a great wish to diminish the dangers of this
new mode of travelling, I declined making any such communication to
them; for, I added, unless these Directors are quite unlike all of whom
I have had any experience, I can foresee the inevitable result of such
a communication. {319}

It might take me some time and trouble to consider the best way of
carrying out the principle and to make the necessary drawings. Some
time after I have placed these in the hands of the Company, I shall
receive a very pretty letter from the secretary, thanking me in the
most flattering terms for the highly ingenious plan I have placed in
their hands, but regretting that their engineer finds certain practical
difficulties in the way.

Now, if the same Company had taken the advice of some eminent engineer,
to whom they would have to pay a large fee, no practical difficulties
would ever be found to prevent its trial.

It was evident from the remarks of several of the party that I had
pointed out the most probable result of any such communication.

It is possible that some report of this plan subsequently reached the
Directors; for about six months after, I received from an officer of
the railway Company a letter, asking my assistance upon this identical
point. I sent them my sketch and all the information I had subsequently
acquired on the subject. I received the stereotype reply I had
anticipated, couched in the most courteous language; in short, quite a
model letter for a young secretary to study.

〈REASONS WHY REJECTED.〉

Several better contrivances than mine were subsequently proposed; but
experience seems to show that the whole train ought to be connected
together as firmly as possible.

Not long after my return from Liverpool I found myself seated at dinner
next to an elderly gentleman, an eminent London banker. The new system
of railroads, of course, was the ordinary topic of conversation. Much
had been said in its favour, but my neighbour did not appear to concur
with the majority. At last I had an opportunity of asking his {320}
opinion. “Ah,” said the banker, “I don’t approve of this new mode of
travelling. It will enable our clerks to plunder us, and then be off
to Liverpool on their way to America at the rate of _twenty_ miles an
hour.” I suggested that science might perhaps remedy this evil, and
that possibly we might send lightning to outstrip the culprit’s arrival
at Liverpool, and thus render the railroad a sure means of arresting
the thief. I had at the time I uttered those words no idea how soon
they would be realized.

〈THE AUTHOR’S EXPERIMENTS ON THE GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY.〉

In 1838 and 1839 a discussion of considerable public importance had
arisen respecting the Great Western Railway. Having an interest in that
undertaking, it was the wish of Mr. Brunel and the Directors that I
should state my own opinion upon the question. I felt that I could not
speak with confidence without making certain experiments. The Directors
therefore lent me steam-power, and a second-class carriage to fit
up with machinery of my own contrivance, and appointed one of their
officers to accompany me, through whom I might give such directions as
I deemed necessary during my experiments.

I removed the whole of the internal parts of the carriage. Through
its bottom firm supports, fixed upon the framework below, passed up
into the body of the carriage, and supported a long table entirely
independent of its motions.

On this table slowly rolled sheets of paper, each a thousand feet long.
Several inking pens traced curves on this paper, which expressed the
following measures:—

 1. Force of traction.

 2. Vertical shake of carriage at its middle.

 3. Lateral ditto.

 4. End ditto.

 5, 6, and 7. The same shakes at the end of the carriage. {321}

 8. The curve described upon the earth by the centre of the frame of
 the carriage.

 9. A chronometer marked half seconds on the paper.

Above two miles of paper were thus covered. These experiments cost me
about 300 _l._, and took up my own time, and that of all the people I
was then employing, during five months.

I had previously travelled over most of the railways then existing in
this country, in order to make notes of such facts as I could observe
during my journeys.

The result of my experiments convinced me that the broad gauge was most
convenient and safest for the public. It also enabled me fearlessly to
assert that an immense array of experiments which were exhibited round
the walls of the meeting-room by those who opposed the Directors were
made with an instrument which could not possibly measure the quantities
proposed, and that the whole of them were worthless for the present
argument. The production of the work of such an instrument could not
fail to damage even a good cause.

On the discussion at the general meeting at the London Tavern, I made a
statement of my own views, which was admitted at the time to have had
considerable influence on the decision of the proprietors. Many years
after I met a gentleman who told me he and a few other proprietors
holding several thousand proxies came up from Liverpool intending to
vote according to the weight of the arguments adduced. He informed
me that he and all his friends decided their votes on hearing my
statement. He then added, “But for that speech, the broad gauge would
not now exist in England.”

〈THE PHILOSOPHER’S ADVENTURES AND ESCAPES BY RAIL.〉

These experiments were not unaccompanied with danger. {322} I
sometimes attached my carriage to a public train to convey me to the
point where my experiments commenced, and I had frequently to interrupt
their course, in order to run on to a siding to avoid a coming train.

I then asked to be allowed to make such experiments during the night
when there were no trains; but Brunel told me it was too dangerous to
be permitted, and that ballast-waggons, and others, carrying machinery
and materials for the construction and completion of the railroad
itself, were continually traversing various parts of the line at
uncertain hours.

The soundness of this advice became evident a very short time after it
was given. On arriving one morning at the terminus, the engine which
had been promised for my experimental train was not ready, but another
was provided instead. On further inquiry, I found that the “North
Star,” the finest engine the Company then possessed, had been placed
at the end of the great polygonal building devoted to engines, in
order that it might be ready for my service in the morning; but that,
during the night, a train of twenty-five empty ballast-waggons, each
containing two men, driven by an engine, both the driver and stoker
of which were asleep, had passed right through the engine-house and
damaged the “North Star.”

Most fortunately, no accident happened to the men beyond a severe
shaking. It ought, however, in extenuation of such neglect, to be
observed that engine-drivers were at that period so few, and so
thoroughly overworked, that such an occurrence was not surprising.

It then occurred to me, that being engaged on a work which was anything
but profitable to myself, but which contributed to the safety of all
travellers, I might, without {323} impropriety, avail myself of the
repose of Sunday for advancing my measures. I therefore desired Brunel
to ask for the Directors’ permission. The next time I saw Brunel, he
told me the Directors did not like to give an official permission,
but it was remarked that having put one of their own officers under
my orders, I had already the power of travelling on whatever day I
preferred.

I accordingly availed myself of the day on which, at that time,
scarcely a single train or engine would be in motion upon it.

Upon one of these Sundays, which were, in fact, the only really
safe days, I had proposed to investigate the effect of considerable
additional weight. With this object, I had ordered three waggons laden
with thirty tons of iron to be attached to my experimental carriage.

On my arrival at the terminus a few minutes before the time appointed,
my aide-de-camp informed me that we were to travel on the north line.
As this was an invasion of the usual regulations, I inquired very
minutely into the authority on which it rested. Being satisfied on this
point, I desired him to order my train out immediately. He returned
shortly with the news that the fireman had neglected his duty, but that
the engine would be ready in less than a quarter of an hour.

A messenger arrived soon after to inform me that the obstructions had
been removed, and that I could now pass upon the south, which was the
proper line.

I was looking at the departure of the only Sunday train, and conversing
with the officer, who took much pains to assure me that there was no
danger on whichever line we might travel; because, he observed, when
that train had departed, there can be no engine except our own on
either line until five o’clock in the evening. {324}

Whilst we were conversing together, my ear, which had become peculiarly
sensitive to the distant sound of an engine, told me that one was
approaching. I mentioned it to my railway official: he did not hear
it, and said, “Sir, it is impossible.”—“Whether it is possible or
impossible,” I said, “an engine _is_ coming, and in a few minutes we
shall see its steam.” The sound soon became evident to both, and our
eyes were anxiously directed to the expected quarter. The white cloud
of steam now faintly appeared in the distance; I soon perceived the
line it occupied, and then turned to watch my companion’s countenance.
In a few moments more I saw it slightly change, and he said, “It _is_,
indeed, on the north line.”

Knowing that it would stop at the engine-house, I ran as fast I could
to that spot. I found a single engine, from which Brunel, covered with
smoke and blacks, had just descended. We shook hands, and I inquired
what brought my friend here in such a plight. Brunel told me that he
had posted from Bristol, to meet the only train at the furthest point
of the rail then open, but had missed it. Fortunately, he said, “I
found this engine with its fire up, so I ordered it out, and have
driven it the whole way up at the rate of fifty miles an hour.”

〈ESCAPES MEETING BRUNEL.〉

I then told him that but for the merest accident I should have met him
on the _same_ line at the rate of forty miles, and that I had attached
to my engine my experimental carriage, and three waggons with thirty
tons of iron. I then inquired what course he would have pursued if he
had perceived another engine meeting him upon his own line.

Brunel said, in such a case he should have put on all the steam he
could command, with a view of driving off the opposite engine by the
superior velocity of his own. {325}

If the concussion had occurred, the probability is, that Brunel’s
engine would have been knocked off the rail by the superior momentum
of my train, and that my experimental carriage would have been buried
under the iron contained in the waggons behind.

These rates of travelling were then unusual, but have now become
common. The greatest speed which I have personally witnessed, occurred
on the return of a train from Bristol, on the occasion of the floating
of the “Great Britain.” I was in a compartment, in conversation with
three eminent engineers, when one of them remarked the unusual speed of
the train: my neighbour on my left took out his watch, and noted the
time of passage of the distance posts, whence it appeared that we were
then travelling at the rate of seventy-eight miles an hour. The train
was evidently on an incline, and we did not long sustain that dangerous
velocity.

One very cold day I found Dr. Lardner making experiments on the Great
Western Railway. He was drawing a series of trucks with an engine
travelling at known velocities. At certain intervals, a truck was
detached from his train. The time occupied by this truck before it
came to rest was the object to be noted. As Dr. Lardner was short of
assistants, I and my son offered to get into one of his trucks and note
for him the time of coming to rest.

〈SAILS ACROSS HANWELL VIADUCT.〉

Our truck having been detached, it came to rest, and I had noted the
time. After waiting a few minutes, I thought I perceived a slight
motion, which continued, though slowly. It then occurred to me that
this must arise from the effect of the wind, which was blowing
strongly. On my way to the station, feeling very cold, I had purchased
three yards of coarse blue woollen cloth, which I wound round my
person. This I now unwound; we held it up as a sail, and gradually
acquiring {326} greater velocity, finally reached and sailed across
the whole of the Hanwell viaduct at a very fair pace.

〈THE BATTLE OF THE GAUGES.〉

The question of the best gauge for a system of railways is yet
undecided. The present gauge of 4·8½ was the result of the accident
that certain tram-roads adjacent to mines were of that width. When the
wide gauge of the Great Western was suggested and carried out, there
arose violent party movements for and against it. At the meeting of
the British Association at Newcastle, in 1838, there were two sources
of anxiety to the Council—the discussion of the question of Steam
Navigation to America, and what was called “The battles of the Gauges.”
Both these questions bore very strongly upon pecuniary interests, and
were expected to be fiercely contested.

On the Council of the British Association, of course, the duty of
nominating the Presidents and Vice-Presidents of its various sections
devolves. During the period in which I took an active part in that
body, it was always a principle, of which I was ever the warm advocate,
that we should select those officers from amongst the persons most
distinguished for their eminence in their respective subjects, who were
born in or connected with the district we visited.

In pursuance of this principle, I was deputed by the Council to invite
Mr. George Stephenson to become the President of the Mechanical
Section. In case he should decline it, I was then empowered to offer
it to Mr. Buddle, the eminent coal-viewer; and in case of these both
declining, I was to propose it to the late Mr. Bryan Donkin, of London,
a native of that district, and connected with it by family ties.

〈BRITISH ASSOCIATION AT NEWCASTLE.〉

On my arrival at Newcastle, I immediately called on George Stephenson,
and represented to him the unanimous wish of the Council of the
British Association. To my great {327} surprise, and to my still
greater regret, I found that he at once declined the offer. All my
powers of persuasion were exercised in vain. Knowing that the two
great controverted questions to be discussed most probably formed the
real obstacle, I mentioned them, and added that, as I should be one
of his Vice-Presidents, I would, if he wished it, take the Chair upon
either or upon both the discussions of the Gauges and of the Atlantic
Steam Voyage, or upon any other occasion that might be agreeable or
convenient to himself: I found him immoveable in his decision. I made
another attempt the next day, and renewed the expression of my own
strong feeling, that we should pay respect and honour to the most
distinguished men of the district we visited. I then told him the
course I was instructed by the Council to pursue.

My next step was to apply to Mr. Buddle. I need not repeat the
arguments I employed: I was equally unsuccessful with each of the
eminent men the Council had wished to honour. I therefore now went
back to George Stephenson, told him of the failure of my efforts, and
asked him, if he still persisted in declining the Chair, would he do
me the favour to be one of the Vice-Presidents, as the Council had now
no resource but to place me in the Chair, which I had hoped would have
been occupied by a more competent person.

To this latter application he kindly acceded; and I felt that, with
the assistance of George Stephenson’s and Mr. Donkin’s professional
knowledge, and their presence by my side, I should be able to keep
order in these dreaded discussions.

The day before the great discussion upon Atlantic Steam Navigation,
I had a short conversation with Dr. Lardner: I told him that in my
opinion some of his views were hasty; {328} but that much stronger
opinions had been assigned to him than those he had really expressed,
and I recommended him to admit as much as he fairly could.

〈RAILWAY DISCUSSION.〉

At the appointed hour the room was filled with an expectant and rather
angry audience. Dr. Lardner’s beautiful apparatus for illustrating his
views was before them, and the Doctor commenced his statement. He was
listened to with the greatest attention, and was really most judicious
as well as very instructive. At the very moment which seemed to me the
most favourable for it, he turned to the explanation of the instruments
he proposed to employ, and having concluded his statement, it became my
duty to invite discussion upon the question.

I did so in very few words, merely observing that several opinions had
been attributed to Dr. Lardner which he had never maintained, and that
additional information had induced him candidly to admit that some of
those doctrines which he had supported were erroneous. I added, that
nothing was more injurious to the progress of truth than to reproach
any man who honestly admitted that he had been in error.

The discussion then commenced: it was continued with considerable
energy, but with great temper; and after a long and instructive debate
the assembled multitude separated. Some few who attended in expectation
of a scene were sorely disappointed. As I was passing out, one of my
acquaintance remarked, “You have saved that —— —— Lardner:” to which I
replied, “I have saved the British Association from a scandal.”

Before I terminate this Chapter on Railways, it will perhaps be
expected by some of my readers that I should point out such measures
as occur to me for rendering this universal system more safe. Since
the long series of experiments I {329} made in 1839, I have had
no experience either official or professional upon the subject. My
opinions, therefore, must be taken only at what they are worth,
and will probably be regarded as the dreams of an amateur. I have
indeed formed very decided opinions upon certain measures relative
to railroads; but my hesitation to make them public arises from
the circumstance, that by publishing them I may possibly delay
their adoption. It may happen, as is now happening to my system of
distinguishing lighthouses from each other, and of night telegraphic
communication between ships at sea—that although officially
communicated to all the great maritime governments, and even publicly
exhibited for months during the Exhibition of 1851, it will be allowed
to go to sleep for years, until some official person, casually hearing
of it, or perhaps re-inventing it, shall have _interest_ with the
higher powers to get it quietly adopted as his own invention. I have
given, in a former page, a list of the self-registering apparatus I
employed in my own experiments.

〈MEANS OF SAFETY FOR TRAINS.〉

In studying the evidence given upon the inquiries into the various
lamentable accidents which have occurred upon railways, I have been
much struck by the discordance of that evidence as to the speed with
which the engines were travelling when they took place.

Even the best and most unbiassed judgment ought not to be trusted when
mechanical evidence can be produced. The first rule I propose is, that—

_Every engine should have mechanical self-registering means of
recording its own velocity at every instant during the whole course of
its journey._

〈SELF-RECORDING MEANS.〉

In my own experiments this was the first point I attended to. I took a
powerful spring clock, with a chronometer movement, which every half
second lifted a peculiar pen, and left {330} a small dot of ink upon
the paper, which was moving over a table with the velocity given to it
by the wheels of the carriage.

Thus the comparative frequency of these dots indicated the rate of
travelling at the time. But the instrument was susceptible of giving
different scales of measurement. Thus it might be that only three
inches of paper passed under the pen in every mile, or any greater
length of paper, up to sixty feet per mile, might be ordered to pass
under the paper during an equal space. Again, the number of dots per
second could, if required, be altered.

The clock was broken four or five times during the earliest
experiments. This arose from its being fixed upon the platform carrying
the axles of the wheels. I then contrived a kind of parallel motion, by
which I was enabled to support the clock upon the carriage-springs, and
yet allow it to impress its dots upon the paper, which did not require
that advantage. After this, the clock was never injured.

The power of regulating the length of paper for each mile was of great
importance; it enabled me to examine, almost microscopically, the
junctions of the rails. When a large scale of paper was allowed, every
joining was marked upon the paper.

I find, on referring to my paper records, that on the 3rd March, 1839,
the “Atlas” engine drew my experimental carriage, with two other
carriages attached behind it, from Maidenhead to Drayton, with its
paper travelling only eleven feet for each mile of journey; whilst from
Drayton to Slough, forty-four feet of paper passed under the pen during
each mile of progress.

The inking pens at first gave me some trouble, but after successively
discovering their various defects, and remedying {331} them at an
expense of nearly £20, they performed their work satisfactorily. The
information they gave might be fully relied upon.

〈THEIR REMARKABLE EFFECT.〉

We had an excellent illustration of this on one occasion when we were
returning, late in the evening, from Maidenhead, after a hard day’s
work. The pitchy darkness of the night, which prevented us from seeing
any objects external to our carriage, was strongly contrasted with
the bright light of four argand lamps within it. I was accompanied by
my eldest son, Mr. Herschel Babbage, and three assistants. A roll of
paper a thousand feet in length was slowly unwinding itself upon the
long table extended before us, and winding itself up on a corresponding
roller at its other extremity. About a dozen pens connected with a
bridge crossing the middle of the table were each marking its own
independent curve gradually or by jumps, as the circumstances attending
our railway course was dictating. The self-feeding pens, which the
self-acting roller of blotting-paper continually followed, but never
overtook, were quietly marking their inevitable courses. All had gone
on well for a considerable time amidst perfect silence, if the steady
pace of thirty miles an hour, the dogged automatic action of the
material, and the muteness of the living machinery, admitted of such
a term. Being myself entirely ignorant of our position upon the rail,
I disturbed this busy repose by inquiring whether any one knew where
we were? To this question there was no reply. Each continued to watch
in silence for the duties which his own department might at any moment
require, but no such demands were made.

After some minutes, as I was watching the lengthening curves, I
perceived a slight indication of our position on the railroad. I
instantly looked at my son, and saw, by a faint {332} smile on his
countenance, that he also perceived our situation on the line. I had
scarcely glanced back at the growing curves upon the paper, to confirm
my interpretation, when each of my three assistants at the same instant
called out “Thames Junction.”

At the period I speak of the double line of a small railway, called the
Thames Junction, crossed the Great Western line on a level at between
two and three miles from its terminus. The interruption caused certain
jerks in several of our curves, which, having once noticed, it was
impossible to mistake.

I would suggest that every engine should carry a spring clock, marking
small equal intervals of time by means of a needle-point impinging
upon paper, the speed of whose transit should be regulated by the
speed of the engine. It might, perhaps, be desirable to have a
differently-formed mark to indicate each five minutes. Also, two or
more studs on the driving-wheel should mark upon the same paper the
number of its revolutions. Besides this, it might be imperative on the
engine-driver to mark upon the paper a dot upon passing each of certain
prescribed points upon the railway. This latter is not absolutely
necessary, but may occasionally supply very valuable information.

〈TRACTIVE POWER REGISTERED.〉

The second point which I consider of importance is, that—

_Between every engine and its train there should be interposed a
dynamometer, that is, a powerful spring to measure the force exerted by
the engine._

It may, perhaps, be objected that this would require a certain amount
of movement between the engine and its train. A very small quantity
would be sufficient, say half an inch, or less. The forces in action
are so very large, that even a still smaller amount of motion than this
might be sufficiently magnified. Its indications should be marked by
{333} self-acting machinery governing points impinging upon the paper
on which the velocity is marked.

Whenever any unusual resistance has opposed the progress of the train,
it will thus be marked upon the paper. It will indicate in some
measure the state of the road, and it will assuredly furnish valuable
information in case an accident happens, and the train or the engine
gets off the rails.

〈CURVE OF PROGRESS REGISTERED.〉

The third recommendation I have to make is—

_That the curve described by the centre of the engine itself upon the
plane of the railway should be laid down upon the paper._

Finding this a very important element, I caused a plate of hardened
steel to be pressed by a strong spring against the inner edge of
the rail. It was supported by a hinge upon a strong piece of timber
descending from the platform supporting the carriage itself. The motion
of this piece of steel, arising from the varying position of the wheels
themselves upon the rail, was conveyed to a pen which transferred to
the paper the curve traversed by the centre of the carriage referred to
the plane of the rail itself.

The contrivance and management of this portion of my apparatus was
certainly the most difficult part of my task, and probably the most
dangerous. I had several friendly cautions, but I knew the danger, and
having examined its various causes, adopted means of counteracting its
effect.

After a few trials we found out how to manage it, and although it often
broke four or five times in the course of the day’s work, the fracture
inevitably occurred at the place intended for it, and my first notice
of the fact often arose from the blow the fragment made when suddenly
drawn by a strong rope up to the under side of the floor of our
experimental carriage.

I have a very strong opinion that the adoption of such {334}
mechanical registrations would add greatly to the security of railway
travelling, because they would become the unerring record of facts, the
incorruptible witnesses of the immediate antecedents of any catastrophe.

I have, however, little expectation of their adoption, unless Directors
can be convinced that the knowledge derived from them would, by
pointing out incipient defects, and by acting as a check upon the
vigilance of all their officers, considerably diminish the repairs and
working expenses both of the engine and of the rail. Nor should I be
much surprised even if they were pronounced impracticable, although
they existed very nearly a quarter of a century ago.

The question of the gauges has long been settled. A small portion of
broad gauge exists, but it is probable that it will ultimately be
changed. The vast expense of converting the engines and the rolling
stock for use on the narrower gauge presents the greatest obstacle.

〈GEORGE STEPHENSON’S REAL OPINION ON THE QUESTION OF THE GAUGES.〉

It may, however, be interesting to learn the opinion of the father of
railways at an early period of their progress. I have already mentioned
the circumstances under which my acquaintance with George Stephenson
began. They were favourable to that mutual confidence which immediately
arose. I was naturally anxious to ascertain the effect of the existing
experience upon his own mind, but I waited patiently until a favourable
opportunity presented itself.

At a large public dinner, during the meeting of the British Association
at Newcastle, I sat next to George Stephenson. It occurred to me that
the desired opportunity had now arrived. I said little about railways
until after the first glass of champagne. I mentioned several that
I had travelled upon, and the conclusions I had drawn relative to
the mechanical department. I then referred to the economy of {335}
management, and pointed out one railway in which the accounts were so
well arranged, that I had been able to arrive at a testing point of an
opinion I had formed from my own observations.

One great evil of the narrow gauge was, that when some trifling
derangement in the engine occurred, which might be repaired at the
expense of two or three shillings, it frequently became necessary
to remove uninjured portions of the machine, in order to get at the
fault; that the re-making the joints and replacing these parts thus
temporarily removed, frequently led to an expense of several pounds.

The second glass of champagne now interrupted a conversation which
was, I hope, equally agreeable to both, and was certainly very
instructive for me. I felt that the fairest opportunity I could desire
of ascertaining my friend’s real opinion of the gauge had now arrived.
Availing myself of the momentary pause after George Stephenson’s glass
was empty, I said—

“Now, Mr. Stephenson, will you allow me to ask you to suppose for an
instant that no railways whatever existed, and yet that you were in
full possession of all that large amount of knowledge which you have
derived from your own experience. Under such circumstances, if you were
consulted respecting the gauge of a system of railways about to be
inaugurated, would you advise the gauge of 4 feet 8½ inches?”

“Not exactly that gauge,” replied the creator of railroads; “I would
take a few inches more, but a very few.”

I was quite satisfied with this admission, though I confess it reminded
me of the frail fair one who, when reproached by her immaculate friend
with having had a child—an ecclesiastical licence not being first
obtained—urged, as an extenuating circumstance, that it was a very
small one. {336}

〈RAILWAYS OF THE FUTURE.〉

In this age of invention, it is difficult to predict the railroads
of the future. Already it has been suggested to give up wheels and
put carriages upon sledges. This would lower the centre of gravity
considerably, and save the expense of wheels. On the other hand, every
carriage must have an apparatus to clean and grease the rails, and the
wear and tear of these latter might overbalance the economy arising
from abolishing wheels.

Again, short and much-frequented railways might be formed of a broad,
continuous strap, always rolling on. At each station means must exist
for taking up and putting down the passengers without stopping the
rolling strap.

The exhaustion of air in a continuous tunnel was proposed many years
ago for the purpose of sucking the trains along. This has recently been
applied with success to the transmission of parcels and letters.

Possibly in the next International Exhibition a light railway might be
employed within the building.[49]

1st. A quick train to enable visitors to get rapidly from end to end,
avoiding the crowd and saving time, say at the expense of a penny.

2nd. A very slow train passing along the most attractive line, and
occasionally stopping, to enable persons not capable of bearing the
fatigue of pushing on foot through crowds.

If such railways were considered in the original design of the
building, they might be made to interfere but little with the general
public, and would bring in a considerable revenue to the concern.

     [49] A gallery, elevated about seven feet, in the centre of each
     division of the new National Gallery, might be used either for a
     light railway, or for additional means of seeing the pictures on
     the walls.

{337}




CHAPTER XXVI.

STREET NUISANCES.


 Various Classes injured — Instruments of Torture — Encouragers;
 Servants, Beer-shops, Children, Ladies of elastic virtue — Effects on
 the Musical Profession — Retaliation — Police themselves disturbed
 — Invalids distracted — Horses run away — Children run over — A
 Cab-stand placed in the Author’s street attracts Organs — Mobs
 shouting out his Name — Threats to Burn his House — Disturbed in the
 middle of the night when very ill — An average number of Persons
 are always ill — Hence always disturbed — Abusive Placards — Great
 Difficulty of getting Convictions — Got a Case for the Queen’s Bench
 — Found it useless — A Dead Sell — Another Illustration — Musicians
 give False Name and Address — Get Warrant for Apprehension — They keep
 out of the way — Offenders not yet found and arrested by the Police
 — Legitimate Use of Highways — An Old Lawyer’s Letter to _The Times_
 — Proposed Remedies; Forbid entirely — Authorize Police to seize the
 Instrument and take it to the Station — An Association for Prevention
 of Street Music proposed.

During the last ten years, the amount of street music has so
greatly increased that it has now become a positive nuisance to a
very considerable portion of the inhabitants of London. It robs
the industrious man of his time; it annoys the musical man by its
intolerable badness; it irritates the invalid; deprives the patient,
who at great inconvenience has visited London for the best medical
advice, of that repose which, under such circumstances, is essential
for his recovery, and it destroys the time and the energies of all the
intellectual classes of society by its continual interruptions of their
pursuits. {338}

_Instruments of torture permitted by the Government to be in daily and
nightly use in the streets of London._

 Organs.
 Brass bands.
 Fiddles.
 Harps.
 Harpsichords.
 Hurdy-gurdies.
 Flageolets.
 Drums.
 Bagpipes.
 Accordions.
 Halfpenny whistles.
 Tom-toms.
 Trumpets.
 The human voice in various forms.
   Shouting out objects for sale.
   Religious canting.
   Psalm-singing.

I have very frequently been disturbed by such music after eleven and
even after twelve o’clock at night. Upon one occasion a brass band
played, with but few and short intermissions, for five hours.

_Encouragers of Street Music._

 Tavern-keepers.
 Public-houses.
 Gin-shops.
 Beer-shops.
 Coffee-shops.
 Servants.
 Children.
 Visitors from the country.
 Ladies of doubtful virtue.
 Occasionally titled ladies;
   but these are almost invariably
   of recent elevation, and
   deficient in that taste which
   their sex usually possess.

The habit of frequenting public-houses, and the amount of intoxication,
is much augmented by these means. It therefore finds support from
the whole body of licensed victuallers, and from all those who are
interested, as the proprietors of public-houses.

The great encouragers of street music belong chiefly to the lower
classes of society. Of these, the frequenters of public-houses and
beer-shops patronize the worst and the most {339} noisy kinds of
music. The proprietors of such establishments find it a very successful
means of attracting customers. Music is kept up for a longer time,
and at later hours, before the public-house, than under any other
circumstances. It not unfrequently gives rise to a dance by little
ragged urchins, and sometimes by half-intoxicated men, who occasionally
accompany the noise with their own discordant voices.

Servants and children are great admirers of street music; also people
from the country, who, coming up to town for a short time, often
encourage it.

Another class who are great supporters of street music, consists
of ladies of elastic virtue and cosmopolitan tendencies, to whom
it affords a decent excuse for displaying their fascinations at
their own open windows. Most ladies resident in London are aware of
this peculiarity, but occasionally some few to whom it is not known
have found very unpleasant inferences drawn, in consequence of thus
gratifying their musical taste.

 MUSICAL PERFORMERS.

 _Musicians._                   _Instruments._
   Italians                       Organs.
   Germans                        Brass bands.
   Natives of India               Tom-toms.
   English                        Brass bands, fiddles, &amp;c.
   The lowest class of clubs      Bands with double drum.

The most numerous of these classes, the organ-grinders, are natives of
Italy, chiefly from the mountainous district, whose language is a rude
_patois_, and who are entirely unacquainted with any other. It is said
that there are above a thousand of these foreigners usually in London
employed in tormenting the natives. They mostly reside in {340} the
neighbourhood of Saffron Hill, and are, of course, from their ignorance
of any other language than their own, entirely in the hands of their
padrones. One of these, a most persevering intruder with his organ,
gave me a false address. Having ascertained the real address, he was
sought for by the police for above a fortnight, but not discovered. His
_padrone_ becoming aware of his being “_wanted_,” sent him on a country
circuit. I once met, within a few miles of the Land’s End, one of these
fellows whom I had frequently sent away from my own street.

The amount of interruption from street music, and from other occasional
noises, varies with the nature and the habits of its victims. Those
whose minds are entirely unoccupied receive it with satisfaction,
as filling up the vacuum of time. Those whose thoughts are chiefly
occupied with frivolous pursuits or with any other pursuits requiring
but little attention from the reasoning or the reflective powers,
readily attend to occasional street music. Those who possess an
impaired bodily frame, and whose misery might be alleviated by _good_
music at proper intervals, are absolutely driven to distraction by the
vile and discordant music of the streets waking them, at all hours, in
the midst of that temporary repose so necessary for confirmed invalids.

By professional musicians its effects are most severely felt. It
interrupts them in their own studies, and entirely destroys the
value of the instructions they are giving their domestic pupils.
When they leave their own house to give lessons to their employers,
the “_infernal_” organ still pursues them. Their Belgravian employer
is obliged, at every lesson, to bribe the itinerant miscreant to
desist—his charge for this act of mercy being from a shilling to
half-a-crown for each lesson. {341}

It is, however, right to hint to the members of the musical profession,
that their immediate neighbours do not quite so much enjoy even the
most exquisite professional music when filtered through brick walls,
or transmitted circuitously and partially through open windows into
the houses of their neighbours. I know of no remedy to propose for the
benefit of the latter class, but I think that a proper self-respect
should induce the professional musician himself to close his windows,
and even to suffer the inconvenience of heat, rather than permanently
annoy his neighbours.

The law of retaliation, which is only justified when other arguments
fail, was curiously put in force in a case which was brought under
my notice a few years ago. An artist of considerable eminence, who
resided in the west end of London, had for many a year pursued his
own undisturbed and undisturbing studies, when one fine morning his
professional studies were interrupted by the continuous sound of music
transmitted through the wall from his neighbour’s house.

Finding the noise continuous and his interruption complete, he rang
for his servant, and putting his maul into the man’s hand desired him
to continue knocking against the wall from whence the disturbance
proceeded until he returned from a walk in the Park. He added that he
should probably be absent for an hour, and that if any person called
and wished to see him, he should be at home at the end of that time.

On his return he was informed that the new tenant of the adjacent
house had called during his absence, and that on being informed of the
hour of his master’s return, he had expressed his intention of calling
again. A short time after this the new tenant of the adjacent house
was introduced. He apologized for this visit to a stranger, but said
that during the last hour he had been annoyed by a most extraordinary
knocking {342} against the wall, which entirely interrupted his
professional pursuits.

To this the artist replied in almost precisely the same words, that
during the previous hour he had been annoyed by a most extraordinary
and unusual sound which entirely interrupted _his_ professional
pursuits. After some discussion it was settled that the piano should
be removed to the opposite wall, and that it should be covered with a
stratum of blankets.

This arrangement went on for a few months; but the pupils and their
relatives disapproving of a dumb piano gradually left the professor,
who found it desirable to give up the house and retire to a more
music-tolerating neighbourhood. In this case the evil was equal on both
sides, and it was reasonable that the new comer should retire.

In my own case it has often been suggested to me to retaliate; and as
many of my interruptions have been _intentional_, that course might be
justifiable. But as they have been confined to one or two of the lowest
persons in the neighbourhood, I thought it not right to disturb my more
respectable neighbours. The means at my command for producing the most
hideously discordant noises are ample, having a considerable collection
of shrill organ pipes, with appropriate bellows, and an indefatigable
steam engine ever ready to work them whilst I might be “taking a walk
in the Park.” I hope by the timely amendment of the law no person may
be driven to practise what it refuses to prevent, and thus test the
laws of the country by the _reductio ad absurdum_.

It is difficult to estimate the misery inflicted upon thousands of
persons, and the absolute pecuniary penalty imposed upon multitudes
of intellectual workers by the loss of their time, destroyed by
organ-grinders and other similar nuisances.

I have witnessed much and suffered more; many {343} communications
on the subject have reached me, and I fear that I may appear to have
neglected several of them. I hope, however, that the great sacrifice
of my own time, which has been forced upon me in order to secure the
remainder, may be accepted as my excuse. I will now mention some few of
the results.

Even policemen have frequently told me that organs are a great nuisance
to them personally. A large number of the police are constantly on
night duty, and of course these can only get their sleep during the
day. On such occasions their rest is constantly broken by the nuisance
of street music.

A lady, the wife of an officer on half-pay, writes to me, stating
her own sad case. Her husband, suffering under a painfully nervous
affection, is brought up to London for the benefit of medical advice.
Under these circumstances a sensible improvement takes place, but it
requires time and constant attention to advance the cure. In order to
profit by the eminent skill which London supplies, the lady and her
husband, at considerable sacrifice, take a very small house in a very
quiet little square. Unfortunately, the organ-grinders had possession
of it, and no entreaties would banish them. The irritation produced on
the invalid was frightful, and I feel it some relief not to have known
its almost inevitable termination.

Various accidents occur as the consequence of street music. It
occasionally happens that horses are frightened, and perhaps their
riders thrown; that carriages are run away with, and their occupiers
dreadfully alarmed and possibly even bruised.

The following casualties were reported, about three years ago, in most
of the daily newspapers:—

 “SHOCKING OCCURRENCE.—SIX CHILDREN RUN OVER AND MUTILATED.—Yesterday
 afternoon, shortly after four o’clock, a German band, whilst {344}
 performing in the Old St. Pancras Road, was the cause of a most
 dreadful accident. At the time mentioned, the band referred to was
 playing at the corner of Aldenham Terrace, when a man named Charles
 Field was driving one of Atcherley’s (the horse-slaughterer’s) carts
 down Aldenham Street. At the end of Aldenham Street there is a
 great declivity into the St. Pancras Road, and just as the cart was
 turning it, laden with a dead horse, the big drum was beaten with
 extraordinary violence. A cart was standing on the opposite side
 of the road, to avoid which a short turn on the part of the driver
 of Atcherley’s cart was necessary. The sudden beating of the drum
 caused the horse to take fright, and the driver being pitched head
 foremost from his seat, caused him to lose control over the animal
 he was driving, which dashed in amongst the children and others who
 were standing in the road listening to the music, knocking them down
 right and left. When the consternation created by the occurrence had
 subsided, no less than six poor children were found lying on the
 ground in a helpless condition, the vehicle having passed over some
 part of their persons. They were conveyed as fast as possible into the
 adjacent surgery of Dr. Sutherin, of 28, Aldenham Terrace, who, with
 his assistant, promptly attended upon them.

 “William Hill, aged nine years, of 34, Stanmore Street, who had
 sustained fractured ribs and other injuries; and

 “Charles Harwood, aged eleven years, of 4, Clarendon Square, with
 fracture of the left arm and groin, as well as right leg, caused by
 the vehicle passing over them, were removed, by direction of Dr.
 Sutherin, to University College Hospital.

 “The other sufferers are Robert Thwaites, of 2, St. Pancras Square,
 aged seven years, injury to leg and one of his feet;

 “James Gunn, 34, Stanmore Street, crushed toes;

 “William Young, 8, Percy Terrace, aged six years, contusion to head
 and face; and

 “A child, name unknown, considerably injured.

 “The persons who witnessed the occurrence do not attribute any blame
 to the driver; but as soon as it took place the German band were off
 with as little delay as possible.”—_Daily Telegraph, Oct. 3, 1861._

If this sad accident had fortunately happened in Belgravia, there can
be little doubt that the law would have been altered, in order to
prevent the recurrence of such frightful misery.

No attempt, however, has yet been made to remove the cause; and I have
myself more recently seen a German brass band playing in a very narrow,
crowded street, close to the {345} Bank of England, at three o’clock
in the afternoon, making it difficult to pass, as well as dangerous to
one’s pocket.

On another occasion, at two o’clock, a German band was playing in
Piccadilly, at that crowded part, the Circus. In both instances the
police were looking on, and seemed to enjoy the music they were not
directed to stop.

I have obtained, in my _own_ country, an unenviable celebrity, not by
anything I have done, but simply by a determined resistance to the
tyranny of the lowest mob, whose love, not of music, but of the most
discordant noises, is so great that it insists upon enjoying it at all
hours and in every street. It may therefore be expected that I should
in this volume state at least the outline of my own case.

I claim no merit for this resistance; although I am quite aware that
I am fighting the battle of every one of my countrymen who gains
his subsistence by his intellectual labour. The simple reason for
the course I have taken is, that however disagreeable it has been,
it would have been still more painful to have given up a great and
cherished object, already fully within my reach. I have been compelled
individually to resist this tyranny of the lowest mob, because the
Government itself is notoriously afraid to face it.

On a careful retrospect of the last dozen years of my life, I have
arrived at the conclusion that I speak within limit when I state that
one-fourth part of my working power has been destroyed by the nuisance
against which I have protested. Twenty-five per cent. is rather too
large an additional income-tax upon the brain of the intellectual
workers of this country, to be levied by permission of the Government,
and squandered upon its most worthless classes.

The effect of a _uniform_ and _continuous_ sound, in distracting the
attention or in disturbing intellectual pursuits, is almost {346}
insensible. Those who reside near a waterfall—even Niagara—have their
organs soon seasoned and adapted to its monotony. It is the _change_
from quietness to noise, or from one kind of noise to another, which
instantly distracts the attention. It would be equally distracted by
the reverse—by the sudden change from the hum of the busy world to the
stillness of the desert.

The injurious effect of noisy interruptions upon our attention also
varies with the nature of the investigations upon which we are engaged.
If they are of a kind requiring but a very small amount of intellectual
effort, as, for instance, the routine of a public office, they will
be little felt. If, on the other hand, those subjects are of such a
character as to require the highest efforts of the thinker, then their
examination is interrupted by the slightest change in the surrounding
circumstances.

When the work to be done is proportioned to the powers of the mind
engaged upon it, the painful effect of interruption is felt as deeply
by the least intellectual as by the most highly gifted. The condition
which determines the maximum of interruption is,—that the mind
disturbed, however moderate its powers, shall be working up to its full
stretch.

Finding, many years ago, the increasing interruption of my pursuits
from street music, as it is now tolerated, I determined to endeavour to
get rid of it by putting in force our imperfect law, as far it goes. I
soon found how very imperfect it is.

The first step is to require the performer to desist, and to assign
illness or other sufficient reason for the request. If a female
servant is sent on this mission it is quite useless. The organ-player
is scarcely ever acquainted with more than four or five words of our
language: but these always the most {347} vulgar, the most offensive,
and the most insulting. If a manservant is sent, the Italians are
often very insolent, and constantly refuse to depart. But there are
multitudes of sufferers who are ill and are in lodgings, and have no
servant to send. Besides, the servants must occasionally be absent,
being sent by their employers on their various duties.

The principle on which I proposed to act is, whenever it can be fully
carried out, usually very effective. It was simply this—to make it more
unprofitable to the offender to do the wrong than the right.

Whenever, therefore, an itinerant musician disturbed me, I immediately
sent out, or went out myself, to warn him away. At first this was not
successful; but after summoning and convicting a few, they found out
that their precious time was wasted, and most of them deserted the
immediate neighbourhood. This would have succeeded had the offenders
been few in number; but their name is legion: upwards of a thousand
being constantly in London, besides those on their circuit in the
provinces.

It was not, however, the interest of those who deserted my station
to inform their countrymen of its barrenness; consequently, the
freshly-imported had each to gain his own experience at the expense
of his own and of my time. Perhaps I might have succeeded at last in
banishing the Italian nuisance from the neighbourhood of my residence;
but various other native professors of the art of tormenting with
discords increased as the licence of these Italian itinerants was
encouraged. Another event, however, occurred, which added much more
seriously to my difficulty.

Many years before I had purchased a house in a very quiet locality,
with an extensive plot of ground, on part of which I had erected
workshops and offices, in which I might carry {348} on the experiments
and make the drawings necessary for the construction of the Analytical
Engine. Several years ago the quiet street in which I resided was
invaded by a hackney-coach stand. I, in common with most of the
inhabitants, remonstrated and protested against this invasion of
our comfort and this destruction of the value of our property. Our
remonstrance was ineffectual: the hackney-coach stand was established.

The immediate consequence was obvious. The most respectable tradesmen,
with some of whom I had dealt for five-and-twenty years, saw the ruin
which was approaching, and, wisely making a first sacrifice, at once
left their deteriorated property as soon as they could find for it a
purchaser. The neighbourhood became changed: coffee-shops, beer-shops,
and lodging-houses filled the adjacent small streets. The character of
the new population may be inferred from the taste they exhibit for the
noisiest and most discordant music.

I have looked in vain for any public advantage to justify this heavy
injury to private property. It will scarcely be believed that another
hackney-coach stand actually exists within two hundred yards,[50]
namely, that in Paddington Street, which has a very large space
unoccupied by any houses on either side of the street, and which had
frequently cabs on it plying for hire during the whole night.

     [50] The distance of the most eastern cab on the stand in Dorset
     Street from the spot in Paddington Street, on which cabs might
     stand without being opposite any houses, is in reality less than
     140 yards. I am not aware of any two cab-stands placed so near
     each other as those in question.

In endeavouring to put in force the existing law, imperfect as it is,
I have met with sundry small inconveniences which a Cabinet Minister
might perhaps think trivial, but which, in a slight degree, try the
temper even of a philosopher. {349}

Some of my neighbours have derived great pleasure from inviting
musicians, of various tastes and countries, to play before my windows,
probably with the pacific view of ascertaining whether there are
not some kinds of instruments which we might both approve. This has
repeatedly failed, even with the accompaniment of the human voice
divine, from the lips of little shoeless children, urged on by their
ragged parents to join in a chorus rather disrespectful to their
philosophic neighbour.

The enthusiasm of the performer, excited by such applause, has
occasionally permitted him to dwell too long upon the already forbidden
notes, and I have been obliged to find a policeman to ascertain the
residence of the offender. In the meantime the crowd of young children,
urged on by their parents, and backed at a judicious distance by a set
of vagabonds, forms quite a noisy mob, following me as I pass along,
and shouting out rather uncomplimentary epithets. When I turn round
and survey my illustrious tail, it stops; if I move towards it, it
recedes: the elder branches are then quiet—sometimes they even retire,
wishing perhaps to avoid my future recognition. The instant I turn,
the shouting and the abuse are resumed, and the mob again follow at a
respectful distance. The usual result is that the deluded musicians
find themselves left in the lurch at the police-court by their
enthusiastic encouragers, and have to pay a heavier fine for having
contributed to collect this unruly and ungenerous mob.

Such occurrences have unfortunately been by no means rare. In one case
there were certainly above a hundred persons, consisting of men, women,
and boys, with multitudes of young children, who followed me through
the streets before I could find a policeman. To such an extent has this
{350} annoyance of shouting out my name, without or with insulting
epithets, been carried, that I can truly affirm, unless I am detained
at home by illness, no week ever passes without many instances of it.

The police tell me that the children, “who are put up to the trick
by their parents,” belong chiefly to several ragged-schools in my
neighbourhood. I have myself repeatedly traced numbers of them into the
Portman Chapel School, in East Street. In one instance I went into that
school and made a formal complaint to the teacher, who expressed great
regret for it, and requested me, if I could see any of the offenders,
to point them out; but amongst the number of children then present I
was unable to identify the offenders.

The insults arising from boys, set on by their parents, and from other
older, and therefore less pardonable offenders, shouting out my name
under my windows, or as I pass along the streets, and even in the
middle of the night, are of almost constant occurrence. Of course, I
always appear to take no notice of such circumstances. Only a few days
ago, whilst I was engaged upon the present chapter, I had occasion to
pass down Manchester Street: when I was about half way down, I heard
from that end of the street I had left, loud and repeated cries of
“Stop thief.” I naturally turned round, when I saw two young fellows at
the corner, who repeated the cry twice, as loudly as they could, and
then ran, as hard as they were able, round the corner out of my sight.
There could be no mistake that this was intended to annoy me, because
it happened at a time when there was no person except myself in the
upper part of the street.

Another source of annoyance, fortunately only of a very limited amount,
arises from a perverse disposition of some of my neighbours, who, in
two or three instances, have gone to {351} the expense of purchasing
worn-out or damaged wind instruments, which they are incapable of
playing, but on which they produced a discordant noise for the purpose
of annoying me. One of these appearing at the police-court as a
witness for an organ-grinder, was questioned by the magistrate, and
informed that he would render himself liable to an indictment by the
continuance of such conduct. Another foolish young fellow purchased
a wind instrument with a hole in it, with which he made discordant
noises purposely to annoy me. Travelling in a third-class carriage to
Deptford, he described, with great zest to the person sitting opposite
to him, the instrument, its price, and the use he made of it. The
listener to this confidence was one of the best of my own draughtsmen,
who was quite as much disturbed by the street music as myself. The
police were made acquainted with the fact, and I believe still have,
from time to time, their eyes upon the young vagabond.

Another wilful disturber of my quiet, was a workman inhabiting an
attic in a street which overlooked my garden. When he returned daily
to his dinner, this fellow, possessing a penny tin whistle, opened
his window, and leaning out of it, blew his shrill instrument in the
direction of my garden for about half-an-hour. I simply noted the
fact in a memorandum book, and then employed the time he thought he
was destroying, in taking my daily exercise, or in any other outdoor
mission my pursuits required. After a perseverance in this course
during many months, he discontinued the annoyance, but for what reason
I never knew.

At an early period when I was putting the law in force, as far as I
could, for the prevention of this destruction of my time, I received
constantly anonymous letters, advising, and even threatening me with
all sorts of evils, such as {352} destruction of my property, burning
my house, injury to myself. I was very often addressed in the streets
with similar threats. On one occasion, when I was returning home from
an affair with a mob whom the police had just dispersed, I met, close
to my own door, a man, who, addressing me, said, “You deserve to have
your house burnt, and yourself in it, and I will do it for you, you old
villain.” I asked him if he had any objection to give me his address.
Of course he refused. I then followed him at a short distance, looking
out for a policeman. Whenever he saw one at a distance he turned
rapidly up the next street; this chase continued above half-an-hour;
he was then joined by a companion, an ill-looking fellow. They still
continued to turn off into another street whenever a constable became
visible in the distance. At last we saw a great crowd, into which they
both rushed, and further pursuit became impossible.

I will not describe the smaller evils of dead cats, and other offensive
materials, thrown down my area; of windows from time to time purposely
broken, or from occasional blows from stones projected by unseen hands.

The last annoyance I shall mention, occurred in the month of December
of the past year. I had been suffering considerably from ill-health,
and it became necessary that I should undergo a painful surgical
operation. Late in the night of that day, I got into a refreshing
sleep, when at one o’clock in the morning I was suddenly awakened by
the crash of a brass band, which continued playing whilst I was unable
to move, and was compelled passively to submit to the tormentors.

By a most singular accident, many weeks after, I became possessed of
evidence, that the musicians held a consultation in Manchester Square
about going to the top of the street to wake me up. I am glad, however,
to add, for the credit of {353} human nature, that _one_ of the party
advised them not to do it, and that he himself immediately left them.

It has been found, upon undoubted authority, by returns from benefit
societies, that in London, about 4·72 persons per cent. are constantly
ill. This approximation may be fairly assumed as the nearest yet
attained for the population of London. It follows, therefore, that
about forty-seven out of every thousand inhabitants are always ill.
The number of persons per house varies in different parts. In my own
district it averages ten to each house; in a neighbouring district the
average is thirteen per house.

In Manchester Street, which faces my own residence, there are fifty-six
houses. This, allowing the above average of ill-health, will show
that about twenty-six persons are usually ill in that street. Now the
annoyance from street music is by no means confined to the performers
in the street in which a house is situated. In my own case, there
are portions of five other streets in which street music constantly
interrupts me in my pursuits. If the portions of these five streets are
considered to be only equal in population to that of Manchester Street,
it will appear that upwards of fifty people who are ill, are constantly
disturbed by the same noises which so frequently interrupt my own
pursuits.

The misery inflicted upon those who are really ill is far greater than
that which arises from the mere destruction of time, however valuable.
A friend of mine, himself an excellent magistrate, suffering under a
severe and fatal complaint, was almost driven to distraction during the
last six months of his painful existence, by the constant occurrence of
the organ nuisance, which he was entirely unable to stop.

I have at times made attempts to register the number of such
interruptions in my pursuits; but these have been very {354} partial
and imperfect. I find by some notes, that during about eighty days,
I registered one hundred and sixty-five instances, the greater part
of which I went out myself to put a stop to the nuisance. In several
of these cases my whole day’s work was destroyed, for they frequently
occurred at times when I was giving instruction to my workmen relative
to some of the most difficult parts of the Analytical Engine.

At one period after I had succeeded in getting two or three
convictions, some of my neighbours put themselves to the expense of
having large placards printed, in which they abused me for having put
the law in force against the destroyers of my time. These placards
they stuck up in the windows of their little shops, at intervals from
Edgware Road to Tottenham Court Road. Some of them attempted verse and
thought it poetry; though the only part really imaginative was their
prose statements.

Unfortunately for my comfort, a few years ago, Mr. X——, one of the
magistrates of Marylebone Office, was succeeded by Mr. Y——. Now
the taste of the new magistrate, like that of his predecessor, was
favourable to the Italian organ: his predecessor might, however, have
been excused, as he was deaf. Possibly Mr. Y—— thinks that all Italian
music is high art, and therefore ought to be encouraged.

I soon discovered that it was useless to bring any musical offender
before him, and I had for some time to endure the most intolerable
interruption of my pursuits.

Upon one occasion, when I had summoned an organ-grinder before him, his
decision was, in my opinion, so unsatisfactory, that I determined to
address to the Home Secretary a remonstrance against it.

The case was heard by Mr. Y—— about the middle of July. My letter to
Sir George Grey, accompanied by a series {355} of the placards, was
sent to the Home Office about the middle of August. I waited patiently
for a reply, but, receiving none, I took it for granted that my letter
could not have reached the Home Secretary. At last, on the 17th of
December, I wrote to his private secretary, in order to ascertain
the fact: the reply to my note was—the simple admission that _the
letter had been received_. I confess that this event baffled all my
calculations. I had observed that high officials, distinguished by
their intellectual powers, were occasionally oblivious upon minor
points; but that high officials distinguished only by the office they
held were usually most rigidly courteous and exact.

After this I abstained for a long time from bringing any case before
Mr. Y——. At last a case occurred, which it appeared to me could not be
resisted. I brought it before that magistrate; it was heard, and the
charge was dismissed. Believing the decision to be erroneous in law,
I consulted a solicitor who had much experience in the Metropolitan
Police Courts, with the view of getting the opinion of the Court of
Queen’s Bench upon the subject.

My legal adviser had no doubt that the decision would be favourable,
but urged upon me the great expense, and advised me not to proceed. On
inquiry as to the probable amount, he suggested that it might reach
fifty pounds. I immediately replied that it would be good economy to
purchase my own time at that expense, and I desired him to take the
necessary steps.

The first was to get some housekeeper to enter with me into a bond for
twenty pounds to pay the magistrate’s costs, in case I failed. Having
wasted some time upon this, the magistrate granted a case for the
Queen’s Bench, a copy of which my solicitor immediately sent me. {356}

The grounds of Mr. Y——’s decision, were—

1st. That the man was not _legally_ in custody.

2nd. That he was not within reasonable distance of my house.

3rd. That he did not understand the English language.

On receiving this, I felt quite relieved, and thought that a clear
decision upon these three points would be very cheaply purchased by an
expenditure of fifty pounds.

However, on mentioning the subject to several of my personal friends,
who were themselves high in the profession of the law, I was destined
to be grievously disappointed. I was informed that the Court of Queen’s
Bench would not decide upon any one of the questions, but would decide
generally that the magistrate’s decision was right or was wrong,
without giving me the least intimation on which of the grounds it
rested.

I now perceived the _dodge_ that had been practised upon me, and I
felt compelled to admit that Mr. Y—— was a _clever fellow_. A regard
for truth, however, forbids me to extend the application of this
observation to anybody else concerned in this matter.

I have spared neither expense nor personal trouble in endeavouring to
put a stop to this nuisance. During one twelvemonth those expenses
amounted, within a few shillings, to one hundred and four pounds. I
was not, however, the only sufferer; that amount would otherwise have
been expended in giving a year’s employment to a skilled workman, whose
wages are about two pounds a week.

I shall now give one illustration from my own experience of the utterly
imperfect state of the law for suppressing the nuisance of street
music:—

On Monday, the 29th of February, in the present year, at 3 P.M., in
the midst of a thick fog, a brass band struck up {357} close under
my windows. I was in ill-health, and engaged in a subject requiring
much attention. I knocked at the window; but the band continued their
performance. Then I opened the window and desired them to desist;
they still continued, and I then sent my servant to desire them to go
away. Having finished their tune, they removed about five doors from
my residence, and commenced another performance. My patience being
exhausted, I then went out myself to desire my tormentors to depart.
My servant went on to the station before he could get a constable. In
the meantime the band had removed about six doors further, and began
another tune. At last my servant arrived with a policeman, who took
down the names and addresses of the nine musicians constituting the
band.

The next day I paid twenty-seven shillings for summonses. The day
after, the police informed me that all the addresses given, which were
either in Richmond or Brentford, were false. I applied to the police,
who watched at certain haunts; but they only succeeded in identifying
two of them. I then obtained warrants to apprehend those two, and
came up from the country expressly to attend at the police-court; but
the men were not to be found. I am still waiting in the hope that our
police is not quite so inefficient as to allow them to escape. I have
already been put to the charge of employing a solicitor and to other
expenses. But the band itself is, I believe, still going about in
London and playing every day.

Now, if it had been legal for the police to have taken possession
of the instruments of those disturbers of the public peace, a false
address would have been useless, for it would have been cheaper to have
paid the penalties than to have lost their instruments.

It is, I presume, admitted that streets and high roads are not {358}
the property of those who use them. They are the Queen’s highways, and
were devoted to the public for certain uses only.

The public have an undoubted right to traverse them, and convey over
them persons, goods, materials, &c. The adjacent householders must bear
any amount of noise which is fairly required for the legitimate use of
roads; but no individual has any right to use them for other purposes,
as for instance—

 Theatrical representations—as Punch, Gymnastics.
 Playground and games.
 Religious services.
 Music—as Organs and Brass Bands.

These not merely interfere with their proper use, but disturb the
householders and are in most cases a positive nuisance.

The following letter, from an “Old Lawyer,” recently appeared in _The
Times_. It states the law briefly, and with authority:—

 STREET MUSIC.

 _To the Editor of The Times._

 “SIR,—Whether street music in London ought to be put down or not, I,
 living in the country, am not concerned to answer. I suppose it is a
 question, like smoking, on which the public will always be divided;
 but as the law on the subject is so clear and simple, I am surprised
 how legislators and justices can be puzzled about it.

 “Every public road or street belongs to the Sovereign, as embodying
 the nation, and is accordingly called the King’s or Queen’s highway.
 The interest of each individual is limited to a right of passing
 and repassing over such highway, and he is no more entitled to use
 it for business or amusement than he is to build upon it or dig for
 ore beneath its surface. {359} Hence the keeping of stalls for sale
 is illegal, and, though often winked at, is sometimes denounced and
 punished. Hence, the police are justified in desiring you to ‘move
 on,’ if you loiter, in looking at a shop window or conversing with a
 friend, so as to bar the progress of passengers. _A fortiori_, a band
 of musicians has no _locus standi_ on the ground.

 “There is, in my neighbourhood, a right of way over a gentleman’s
 park. But I have only the privilege of passage, and none of remaining
 on the path for the purpose of reading, sketching, or playing the
 violin.

 “I am, Sir, your obedient Servant,

 “AN OLD LAWYER.”

At most, the tolerance of noisy occupants of the streets, such as
organ-grinders, German bands, _et hoc genus omne_, is on sufferance
only, and neither the municipal law nor common sense justifies the
invasion or curtailment of a man’s liberty to use his brain, and exert
his mental energies as the occasion may require; and that, too, even
within the very recesses of the “Englishman’s castle.”

With respect to the remedies against street music, I am not at all
sanguine. The only one which is certain is, positively to forbid it
in all cases, and with it also that varied multitude of vocal noises
made by persons parading the streets singing, relating tales, praying,
offering trifling articles for sale, &c., all of them with the
transparent object of begging.

In all these cases which admit of it, the police ought to be directed
to take possession of the offensive instrument and convey it to the
police-court, there to await the decision of the magistrate.

Certain street nuisances re-appear periodically every few years: thus
the game called ‘tip-cat’ again prevails. {360}

After a certain number of eyes have been knocked out, the police will
probably have orders to stop the nuisance. It will then be put down in
a few weeks, and, perhaps, after a year or two it may break out afresh,
and be again as easily put down.

A similar cycle occurs with children’s hoops: they are trundled about
until they get under horses’ legs. Now if, as it frequently happens,
they are made of iron, not only is the rider thrown as well as the
horse, but the poor animal is almost sure to have his leg broken.

In these and other similar cases, the offending instrument should
invariably be detained by the police and taken to the station to be
destroyed, or only to be returned on payment of a small fine by the
offending party within three days after the seizure.

If this were the case, a multitude of daily street nuisances would very
soon disappear. Boys with accordions and other noisy instruments, small
children with shrill tin whistles would then be obliged to ask their
parents to go to the police-office and pay a fine for the recovery of
toys, and the parents themselves would prevent their children from
destroying the time of other persons as soon as they were made to feel
that it incurred an equal penalty on their own.

Every kind of noisy instrument, whether organ or harp, or trumpet or
penny whistle, if sounded, should be seized by the police and taken
to the station, also all hoops and instruments for playing games. The
effect of this would ultimately be to diminish the labours of the
police. At first they would have some additional trouble; but a few
months would make the disturbers feel that it was a very unprofitable
practice; and after that, if the police did their duty, they would only
occasionally have to seize a stray instrument or two. {361}

Proper warning of this intention to enforce the law ought to be given.
The multitude of music-halls now established in all parts of London is
such that those who enjoy street music may have a much larger quantity
of it, and of a better kind, at a cheaper rate than that which in their
own street disturbs all their neighbours.

If street music is to be at all tolerated by law, against which I
protest in the strongest manner, then every performer ought to carry on
his back or upon his instrument his name and address, or an authorized
number, by which the public might be saved from wasting their time by
false addresses, now so frequently given.

I have received several suggestions about organizing a society, to
endeavour to put a stop to these street nuisances. My reply has been
that such a combination well managed would probably have a very
considerable effect, but that it would be impossible for me to give up
to it any of my own time. I would willingly subscribe to it, and offer
it any suggestions that might assist its operations. Its most important
duty would be to ascertain whether the present law is sufficient to put
down the nuisance. In case it is not, then it would become necessary
to get it amended, and for that purpose to consult with influential
Members about the introduction of a Bill for that purpose.

Amongst the legal difficulties are the following:—The magistrates in
different districts interpret the law differently. Might it not be
expedient that police magistrates should meet from time to time and
discuss such differences of opinion, and agree to act upon that of the
majority? Or ought they not to apply to the Home Secretary for his
authority how to interpret it?

If I am right in the opinion which is confirmed in the {362} letter of
the “Old Lawyer,” that the Queen’s highways can only be legally used by
her subjects for the passage of themselves and the transport of their
property, then it is desirable to ascertain how that principle of the
common law can be enforced. Hitherto all proceedings have been under
certain clauses of the Metropolitan Police Act.

In case any Association should be formed to endeavour to procure
an Act of Parliament to put an end to the music nuisance, it would
be desirable to apply distinctly to each of the Members for the
Metropolitan Boroughs, in order that it might be known on which side of
the question they intended to vote.

As upon all other subjects, men differ upon street nuisances. An
ancient philosopher divided all mankind into _two_ sections, namely,
fools and philosophers; and, unhappily for the race, the one cannot
enjoy his whistle except at the expense of the other. I was once asked
by an astute and sarcastic magistrate whether I seriously believed that
a man’s brain would be injured by listening to an organ; my reply was,
“_Certainly not_;” for the obvious reason that no man having brain ever
listened to street musicians.

 “The opera, like the pillory, may be said
 To nail the ears down, but expose the head.”

I believe that the greater part of the householders of London would
gladly assist in putting a stop to street-music. The proportion of
cases prosecuted compared with the number of interruptions, is, in
my own case, less than one in a thousand. If the annoyance is not
absolutely prohibited by law, the number of the police must be at least
double, to give quiet working people any repose.

{363}




CHAPTER XXVII.

WIT.


 Poor Dogs — Puns Double and Triple — History of the Silver Lady —
 Disappointed by the Milliner — The Philosopher performs her functions
 — Lady Morgan’s Criticism — Allsop’s Beer — Sydney Smith — Toss up a
 Bishop — Lady M . . . and the Gipsy in Spain — Epigram on the Planet
 Neptune — Epigram on Henry Drummond’s attack upon Catholics in the
 House of Commons — On Catholic Miracles.

It has often struck me that an analysis of the causes of wit would be
a very interesting subject of inquiry. With that view I collected many
jest-books, but fortunately in this one instance I had resolution to
abstain from distracting my attention from more important inquiries.

I may, however, note some illustrations of it which occur to my memory.
The late Sir Harris Nicolas used to practice rather strongly upon some
of his friends. I was not an unwilling victim. The pleasure derived
from the wit far exceeded any pain it inflicted. Indeed, Sir Harris
himself one day expressed his disappointment at my insensibility, by
saying that he had never in his whole life been able really to hit me.

The late Lord S . . . . was sitting with him one morning listening to a
very astute but rather dry explanation of some matter about which his
Lordship had inquired. At last he threw himself back in his arm-chair
and said, “My dear Nicolas, I am very stupid this morning: my brains
are all {364} gone to the dogs.” On which Sir Harris pathetically
exclaimed,—“Poor dogs!”

It is evident in this case, that the wit of the reply arose from
sympathy expressed on the wrong side. The peer expected sympathy from
the knight: but the knight gave it to the dogs.

Another remarkable feature of jokes formed upon this principle is, that
they generally depend upon the intimate meaning of the words employed,
and not either upon their sound or their arrangement; consequently,
they possess the rare quality of being translatable into all languages.

One of the principles of discovery in many subjects is, to generalize
from the individual case up to the species, and thence to descend to
other individual instances.

〈A TRIPLE PUN.〉

Puns are detestable. The greater number of them depend on the double
meaning of the same word, or on the similar pronunciation of words
differently spelt. The following may serve as an example of a triple
pun:—

A gentleman calling one morning at the house of a lady whose sister was
remarkably beautiful, found her at the writing-table. Putting his hand
upon the little bell used for calling the attendant, he inquired of the
lady of the house what relationship existed between his walking-stick,
her sister, and the instrument under his finger.

 His walking-stick was {cane, Cain} the brother of {a bell, a belle,
 Abel}.

I mentioned, in an early chapter, my boyish admiration of an automaton
in the shape of a silver lady, who attitudinized in the most graceful
manner. Her fate was singular: at the death of her maker she was
sold with the rest of his collection {365} of mechanical toys, and
was purchased by Weekes, who had a mechanical exhibition in Cockspur
Street. No attempt appears to have been made to finish the automaton;
and it seems to have been placed out of the way in an attic uncovered
and utterly neglected.

〈THE SILVER LADY.〉

On the sale by auction of Weeke’s Museum, I met again the object of my
early admiration. Having purchased the silver figure, I proceeded to
take to pieces the whole of the mechanism, and found a multitude of
small holes which had been stopped up as not having fulfilled their
intended object. In fact, it appeared tolerably certain that scarcely
any drawings could have been prepared for the automaton, but that the
beautiful result arose from a system of continual trials.

I myself repaired and restored all the mechanism of the Silver Lady, by
which title she was afterwards known to my friends. I placed her under
a glass case on a pedestal in my drawing-room, where she received,
in her own silent but graceful manner, those valued friends who so
frequently honoured me with their society on certain Saturday evenings.

This piece of mechanism formed a striking contrast with the unfinished
portion of the Difference Engine, No. 1, which was placed in the
adjacent room: the whole of the latter mechanism existed in drawings
upon paper before any portion of it was put together.

The external surface of the figure, which was beautiful in form, was
made of silver. It was, therefore, necessary to supply her with robes
suitable to her station. This would have been rather difficult for a
philosopher, but it was made easy by the aid of one or two of my fair
friends who kindly intervened. These generously assisted with their own
peculiar skill and taste at the _toilette_ of their rival Syren. {366}

Sketches were made and modists of the purest water were employed. The
result was, upon the whole, highly satisfactory. One evening, however,
the arrival of the new dress was postponed to so late a period, that
I feared it had entirely escaped the recollection of the executive
department. The hour at which my friends usually arrived was rapidly
approaching.

In this difficulty it occurred to me that there were a few remnants of
beautiful Chinese crape in the silver lady’s wardrobe. Having selected
two strips, one of pink and the other of light green, I hastily wound
a platted band of bright auburn hair round the block on which her
head-dresses were usually constructed, and then pinned on the folds
of coloured crape. This formed a very tolerable turban, and was not
much unlike a kind of head-dress called a toke, which prevailed at
that period. Another larger piece of the same pink Chinese crape I
wound round her person, which I thought showed it off to considerable
advantage. Fortunately, I found in her wardrobe a pair of small pink
satin slippers, on each of which I fixed a single silver spangle: then
placing a small silver crescent in the front of her turban, I felt I
had accomplished all that time and circumstances permitted.

〈LADY MORGAN’S CRITICISM.〉

The criticisms on the costume of the Silver Lady were various. In the
course of the evening, Lady Morgan communicated to me confidentially
her own opinion of the dress.

Holding up her fan, she whispered, “My dear Mr. Babbage, I think
your Silver Lady is rather slightly clad to-night; shall I lend her
a petticoat?” to which I replied, “My dear Lady Morgan, I am much
indebted for your very considerate offer, but I fear you have not got
_one_ to spare.”

This retort was not a pun, but merely a “double-entendre.” It might
mean either that her Ladyship had on invisibles, but {367} not enough
to be able to spare one: or it might imply that, having no garment of
that kind, she was unable to lend one to a friend.

About the time of the attempt to assassinate the Emperor of the French
by Orsini, an Englishman named Alsop was arrested in London, and
afterwards tried and acquitted of a connection with the assassins.

〈ALLSOP’S BEER.〉

At a distinguished dinner-party, amongst whom was the Attorney-General
of that day, there arose a question as to who Mr. Alsop was. One of
the company asked, “Whether it was Allsop’s beer?” meaning, whether
the prisoner was the concoctor of that delightful beverage. The
gentleman to whom the question was addressed, immediately replied,
“It is not at present Allsop’s _beer_, but,” said he, turning to the
Attorney-General, “if your prosecution succeeds, it is very likely to
become Alsop’s _bier_.”

Sydney Smith occasionally called upon me in the morning, and was ever
a most welcome visitor. The conversation usually commenced upon grave
subjects, and I was always desirous of profiting by the light his
powerful mind threw upon the most difficult questions.

When railways first came into existence much reasonable alarm arose
from the rapidity of the trains and the immense masses of matter in
motion. One morning my friend called and asked my opinion on the
subject. I pointed out what then appeared to me the chief sources of
danger, and entered upon some of the precautions to be attended to, and
of remedies to be applied.

Sydney Smith then asked me why I did not go and inform the Government
of the danger and of the means of remedying it. My answer was, that
such a mission would be a pure waste of time, that nothing whatever
would be done until {368} some great man, a prime minister for
instance, were smashed. I then continued, “Perhaps a bishop or two
would do; for you know,” said I, looking slyly at my friend, “they are
so much better prepared for the change than we are.”

I have heard this view of the subject assigned to Sydney Smith. It is
very probable that it should have occurred to him, although I scarcely
imagine he would have given the reason I did for the preference. His
celebrated suggestion to the person who asked him how a man could find
which way the wind blew when there was no weathercock in sight,[51]
adds to the probability of Sydney Smith’s originality. On the other
hand, I may support my own pretensions to independent invention by
referring to a parallel remark I made many years before:—

     [51] Toss up a bishop.

〈OPINION ON DUELLING.〉

At a large dinner party the subject of duelling was discussed. Various
opinions were propounded as to its absolute necessity. I had made
no remark upon the question, but during a slight pause somebody on
the opposite side of the table asked my opinion on the subject. My
reply was, I always wished that the injured man should fall. On being
asked my reason for that wish, I answered, “Because he is so much
better prepared for the change than the wrong-doer.” I afterwards
learned, with great satisfaction, that when the ladies retired to the
drawing-room, the discussion was much criticized and my reply highly
applauded.

The late Lady M.........., having a great desire to see Mr. Borrow,
asked me to invite him to one of my Saturday evening parties. I
expressed my regret that, not having the pleasure of his acquaintance,
I was unable to ask him to my house, as I never made “lions” of my
guests.

A short time after, a friend who was coming to me on the {369}
following Saturday, called to ask me to allow him to bring Mr. Borrow
who dined with him on that day, to my party in the evening. Of course,
I willingly gave the invitation, and then wrote a note to inform Lady
M.......... of the occurrence of the opportunity she wished for.

On the following Saturday evening Lady M.......... was announced, and
immediately asked me whether Mr. Borrow had arrived. I said that he
had, and that he was in the further room. I then added, that in the
course of a few moments I should have great pleasure in presenting to
her Mr. Borrow.

Lady M.........., who had several other engagements that evening, said,
“Only tell me what sort of a person he is, and I will go and find him
out myself.”

I observed that he was a remarkably tall, straggling person, with a
very intelligent countenance. With these instructions her ladyship left
me, and finding, as she imagined, exactly the man I had described,
immediately accosted him. The conversation was highly interesting, and
included a great variety of widely different subjects. It concluded by
Lady M.......... expressing her delight with her new acquaintance, from
whom she parted with this remark, “What a delightful gipsying life you
must have led!”

〈A SLIGHT MISTAKE.〉

A slight mistake had, however, occurred, which was not discovered until
long after: the person thus addressed was not Mr. Borrow, but Dr.
Whately, the Archbishop of Dublin.

In this chapter may be placed one or two epigrams which, though upon
subjects of transitory interest, may amuse those who are acquainted
with the attending circumstances.

It will be remembered that great discussion arose about the conflicting
claims of Adams and Le Verrier to the {370} discovery of the planet
Neptune. A great controversy resulted, which was at last summed up in
the following couplet:—

 “When Airy was told, he wouldn’t believe it;
  When Challis saw, he couldn’t perceive it.”

〈WINKING STATUES.〉

The clever and eccentric member for East Surrey, the late Henry
Drummond, who founded a professorship of Political Economy at Oxford,
made in the House of Commons a most amusing, though rather strong
speech against the modern miracles of the Roman Catholic Church, in
which he spoke of “their bleeding pictures, their winking statues,
and the Virgin’s milk.” On this some profane wag wrote the following
couplet:—

 “Sagacious Drummond, explain, with your divinity:
  Why reject the milk, yet swallow the virginity?”

Probably some clever fellow of that faith was at the bottom of this
mischief; for I have observed that the cleverest fellows seem to think
that the merit of adhering to a cause entitles them to the right of
quizzing it.

I was particularly struck with this idea when I saw, for the first
time, at Cologne, the celebrated picture of St. Ursula and her eleven
thousand virgins. The artist has quietly made every one of them more or
less matronly.

{371}




CHAPTER XXVIII.

HINTS FOR TRAVELLERS.


 New Inventions — Stomach Pump — Built a Carriage — Description of
 Thames Tunnel — Barton’s Iridescent Buttons — Chinese Orders of
 Nobility — Manufactory of Gold Chains at Venice — Pulsations and
 Respirations of Animals — Punching a Hole in Glass without cracking
 it — Specimen of an Enormous Smash — Proteus Anguineus — Travellers’
 Hotel at Sheffield — Wentworth House.

In this chapter I propose to throw together a few suggestions, which
may assist in rendering a tour successful for its objects and agreeable
in its reminiscences.

Money is the fuel of travelling. I can give the traveller a few hints
how to get money, although I never had any skill in making it myself.

In one tour, extending over more than a twelvemonth, I took with me two
letters of credit, each for half the sum I should probably require.
My reasons for this were, that in case one was lost the other might
still be available. One of these was generally kept about my person,
the other concealed in my writing-case. Another reason was, that if I
were unluckily carried off and detained for a ransom, it might thus be
mitigated.

〈TRAVELLING CARRIAGE.〉

It is of great advantage to a traveller to have some acquaintance
with the use of tools. It is often valuable for his own comfort, and
sometimes renders him able to assist a friend. I met at Frankfort the
eldest son of the coachmaker {372} of the Emperor of Russia. He had
been travelling over the western part of Europe, and showed me drawings
he had made of all the most remarkable carriages he had met with. Some
of these were selected for their elegance, others for the reverse;
take, as an example, the Lord Mayor’s.

We travelled together to Munich, and I took that opportunity of
discussing, seriatim, with my very intelligent young friend, every part
of the structure of a carriage.

I made notes of certain portions in case I should find occasion to have
a carriage built for my own use.

The young Russian was on his way to Moscow, and was very anxious to
prevail on me to accompany him thither, for which purpose he offered
to wait my own time at Munich. As, however, I wished to reach Italy as
soon as possible, I declined his proposition with much regret.

However, in the following year, I profited by the information I then
gained. I had built for me at Vienna, from my own design, a strong
light four-wheeled calèche in which I could sleep at full length.
Amongst its conveniences were a lamp by which I occasionally boiled
an egg or cooked my breakfast. A large shallow drawer in which might
be placed, without folding, plans, drawings, and dress-coats. Small
pockets for the various kinds of money, a larger one for travelling
books and telescopes, and many other conveniences. It cost somewhat
about sixty pounds. After carrying me during six months, at the expense
of only five francs for repair, I sold it at the Hague for thirty
pounds.

It is always advantageous for a traveller to carry with him anything of
use in science or in art if it is of a portable nature, and still more
so if it has also the advantage of novelty. At the time I started on a
lengthened tour the stomach-pump had just been invented. It appeared
to give {373} promise of great utility. I therefore arranged in a
small box the parts of an instrument which could be employed either as
a syringe, a stomach-pump, or for cupping. As a stomach-pump, it was
in great request from its novelty and utility. I had many applications
for permission to make drawings of it, to which I always most willingly
acceded. At Munich, Dr. Weisbrod, the king’s physician, was greatly
interested with it, and at his wish I lent it to the chief surgical
instrument-maker who produced for him an exact copy of the whole
apparatus.

〈DESCRIPTION OF THAMES TUNNEL.〉

Having visited the Thames Tunnel a day or two before I started for the
Continent, I purchased a dozen copies of the very lucid account of
that most interesting work. Six of the copies were in French and the
other six in the German language. I frequently lent a copy, and upon
some occasions I gave one away; but if I had had twice that number I
should have found that I might have distributed them with advantage as
acknowledgments of the many attentions I received.

Another most valuable piece of travelling merchandise consisted of
a dozen large and a dozen small gold buttons stamped by Barton’s
steel dies. These buttons displayed the most beautiful iridescence,
especially in the light of the sun. They were formed by ruling the
steel die in parallel lines in various forms. The lines were from the
four to the ten thousandth of an inch apart.

I possessed a die which Mr. Barton had kindly given me. This I kept in
my writing-case; but I had had a small piece of steel ruled in the same
way, though not with quite the same perfection, which I always kept in
my waistcoat pocket; it was also accompanied by a small gold button in
a sandalwood case. These were frequently of great service. The {374}
mere sight of them procured me many little attentions in diligences
and steamboats.

〈IRIDESCENT BUTTONS.〉

Of course I never appeared to be the possessor of more than one of
these treasured buttons; so that if any one had saved my life, its gift
would have been thought a handsome acknowledgment. If I had travelled
in the East, as I had originally intended until the battle of Navarino
prevented me, my buttons might have given me unlimited success in the
celestial empire.

The Chinese, like ourselves, have five orders of nobility. They are
indicated by spherical buttons. The Chinese nobles, however, wear them
on the top of their caps, whilst our nobility wear their pearls and
strawberry-leaves in their armorial bearings.

It is a curious circumstance that the most anciently civilized nation
should have invented an order of knighthood almost exactly similar to
our own—the order of the Peacock’s Feather—which, like our own Garter,
is confined to certain classes of nobility of the highest rank. Of the
two the decoration of the Chinese noble is certainly the more graceful.

One out of many illustrations may show the use I made of a button.
During my first visit to Venice I wished to see a manufactory of
gold chains for which that city is justly celebrated. I readily got
permission, and the proprietor was so good as to accompany me round his
factory. I had inquired the price of various chains, and had expressed
my wish to purchase a few inches of each kind; but I was informed that
they never sold less than a braccia of any one chain. This amount would
have made my purchase more costly than I proposed, so I gave it up.

〈THE VALUE OF A BUTTON.〉

In the meantime we proceeded through several rooms in which various
processes were going on. Observing some {375} tools in one of the
shops, I took up a file and asked whence it was procured. This led
to a conversation on the subject, in which the proprietor gave me
some account of files from various countries, but concluded by
observing that the Lancashire files, when they could be got, were by
far the best. I took this opportunity of asking him whether he had
seen any of our latest productions in steel: then pulling out of my
waistcoat-pocket the piece of hardened steel, ruled by a diamond, I
put it into his hands. The sun was shining brightly, and he was very
much interested with it. I remarked that in a darkened room, and
with a single lamp, it would be seen with still greater advantage. A
room was soon darkened, and a single lamp produced, and the effect
was still more perfect. My conductor then observed that his managing
man was a very skilful workman, and if I could afford the time, he
should much wish to show him this beautiful sight. I said it always
gave me pleasure to see and converse with a skilful workman, and
that I considered it as time well spent. The master sent for his
superintendent, who, being of a judicious turn of mind, was lavish in
admiring what his master approved. The master himself, gratified by
this happy confirmation, turning to me, said that he would let me have
pieces of any or all of his gold chains of any length, however short I
might wish them to be.

I thanked him for thus enabling me to make my countrymen appreciate
the excellence of Venetian workmanship, and purchased small samples
of every kind of chain then manufactured. These, on my return to
London, I weighed and measured, and referred to them in the economy of
manufactures as illustrations of the different proportions in which
skilled labour and price of raw material occur in the same class of
manufactured articles. {376}

A friend of mine, then at Venice, again visited that city about five
years afterwards. He subsequently informed me that he had purchased, at
the manufactory I visited, samples of gold chains about an inch or two
long, fixed on black velvet, and that it formed a regular article of
trade in some demand.

       *       *       *       *       *

〈PULSATIONS AND INSPIRATIONS.〉

A man may, without being a proficient in any science, and indeed with
only the most limited knowledge of a small portion of it, yet make
himself useful to those who are most instructed. However limited
the path he may himself pursue, he will insensibly acquire other
information in return for that which he can communicate. I will
illustrate this by one of my own pursuits. I possess the slightest
possible acquaintance with the vast fields of animal life, but at
an early period I was struck by the numerical regularity of the
pulsation and of the breathings. It appeared to me that there must
exist some relation between these two functions. Accordingly, I took
every opportunity of counting the numbers of the pulsations and of
the breathings of various animals. The pig fair at Pavia and the book
fair at Leipsic equally placed before me menageries in which I could
collect such facts. Every zoological collection of living animals which
I visited thus gained an additional interest, and occasionally excited
the attention of those in charge of it to making a collection of facts
relating to that subject. This led me at another period to generalize
the subject of inquiry, and to print a skeleton form for the constants
of the class mammalia. It was reprinted by the British Association at
Cambridge in 1833, and also at Brussels in the ‘Travaux du Congress
Général de Statistique,’ Brussels, 1853.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have so frequently been mortified by having the {377}
utterly-undeserved reputation of knowing everything that I was led to
inquire into the probable grounds of the egregious fallacy. The most
frequent symptom was an address of this kind:—“Now Mr. Babbage, will
you, who know everything, kindly explain to me — — —.” Perhaps the
thing whose explanation was required might be the metre of some ancient
Chinese poem: or whether there were any large rivers in the planet
Mercury.

〈HOW TO PUNCH A HOLE IN GLASS.〉

One of the most useful accomplishments for a philosophical traveller
with which I am acquainted, I learned from a workman, who taught me how
to punch a hole in a sheet of glass without making a crack in it.

The process is very simple. Two centre-punches, a hammer, an ordinary
bench-vice, and an old file, are all the tools required. These may be
found in any blacksmith’s shop. Having decided upon the part of the
glass in which you wish to make the hole, scratch a cross (Ⅹ) upon the
desired spot with the point of the old file; then turn the bit of glass
over, and scratch on the other side a similar mark exactly opposite to
the former.

Fix one of the small centre-punches with its point upwards in the vice.
Let an assistant gently hold the bit of glass with its scratched point
exactly resting upon the point of the centre-punch.

Take the other centre-punch in your own left hand and place its point
in the centre of the upper scratch, which is of course nearly, if not
exactly, above the fixed centre-punch. Now hit the upper centre-punch a
_very_ slight blow with the hammer: a mere touch is almost sufficient.
This must be carefully repeated two or three times. The result of these
blows will be to cause the centre of the cross to be, as it were,
gently pounded. {378}

Turn the glass over and let the slight cavity thus formed rest upon the
fixed centre-punch. Repeat the light blows upon this side of the glass,
and after turning it two or three times, a very small hole will be
made through the glass. It not unfrequently happens that a small crack
occurs in the glass; but with a little skill this can be cut out with
the pane of the hammer.

The next process is to enlarge the hole and cut it into the required
shape with the pane of the hammer. This is accomplished by supporting
the glass upon the point of the fixed centre-punch, very close to the
edge required to be cut. A light blow must then be struck with the pane
of the hammer upon the edge to be broken. This must be repeated until
the required shape is obtained.

The principles on which it depends are, that glass is a material
breaking in every direction with a conchoidal fracture, and that the
vibrations which would have caused cracking or fracture are checked by
the support of the fixed centre-punch in close contiguity with the part
to be broken off.

When by hastily performing this operation I have caused the glass to
crack, I have frequently, by using more care, cut an opening all round
the cracked part, and so let it drop out without spreading.

〈CUTTING A HOLE IN GLASS.〉

This process is rendered still more valuable by the use of the diamond.
I usually carried in my travels a diamond mounted on a small circle of
wood, so that I could easily cut out circles of glass with small holes
in the centre. The description of this process is sufficient to explain
it to an experienced workman; but if the reader should wish to employ
it, his readiest plan would be to ask such a person to show him how to
do it.

The above technical description will doubtless be rather {379} dry
and obscure to the general reader; so I hope to make him amends by
one or two of the consequences which have resulted to me from having
instructed others in the art.

〈THE GRATEFUL GLAZIER.〉

In the year 1825, during a visit to Devonport, I had apartments in
the house of a glazier, of whom one day I inquired whether he was
acquainted with the art of punching a hole in glass, to which he
answered in the negative, and expressed great curiosity to see it
done. Finding that at a short distance there was a blacksmith whom he
sometimes employed, we went together to pay him a visit, and having
selected from his rough tools the centre-punches and the hammer, I
proceeded to explain and execute the whole process, with which my
landlord was highly delighted.

On the eve of my departure I asked for the landlord’s account, which
was duly sent up and quite correct, except the omission of the charge
for the apartments which I had agreed for at two guineas a week. I
added the four weeks for my lodgings, and the next morning, having
placed the total amount upon the bill, I sent for my host in order to
pay him, remarking that he had omitted the principal article of his
account, which I had inserted.

He replied that he had intentionally omitted the lodgings, as he could
not think of taking payment for them from a gentleman who had done
him so great a service. Quite unconscious of having rendered him any
service, I asked him to explain how I had done him any good. He replied
that he had the contract for the supply and repair of the whole of the
lamps of Devonport, and that the art in which I had instructed him
would save him more than twenty pounds a year. I found some difficulty
in prevailing on my grateful landlord to accept what was justly his due.

〈MODESTY REWARDED.〉

The second instance I shall mention of the use to which I {380} turned
this art of punching a hole in glass occurred in Italy, at Bologna.

I spent some weeks very agreeably in that celebrated university,
which is still proud of having had the discoverer of the circulation
of the blood amongst its students. One morning an Italian friend
accompanied me round the town, to point out the more remarkable shops
and manufactories. Passing through a small street, he remarked that
there was a very well-informed man who kept a little shop for the sale
of needles and tape and a few other such articles, but who also made
barometers and thermometers, and had a very respectable knowledge
of such subjects. I proposed that we should look in upon him as we
were passing through the street. On entering his small shop, I was
introduced to its tenant, who conversed very modestly and very sensibly
upon various mathematical instruments.

I had invited several of my friends and professors to spend the evening
with me at my hotel, for the purpose of examining various instruments
I had brought with me. I knew that the sight of them would be quite
a treat to the occupier of this little shop, so I mentioned the idea
to my friend, and inquired whether my expected guests in the evening
would think I had taken a liberty with them in inviting the humble
constructor of instruments at the same time.

My friend and conductor immediately replied that he was well known to
most of the professors, and much respected by them, and that they would
think it very kind of me to give him that opportunity of seeing the
instruments I possessed. I therefore took the opportunity of asking him
to join the very agreeable party which assembled in my apartments in
the evening.

〈PRETENSION REPRESSED.〉

We now made a tour of the city, and reached the factory {381} of the
chief philosophical instrument-maker of Bologna. He took great pleasure
in showing me the various instruments he manufactured; but still there
was a certain air of presumption about him, which seemed to indicate
a less amount of knowledge than I should otherwise have assigned to
him. I had on the preceding day mentioned to my Italian friend, who now
accompanied me, that there existed a very simple method of punching a
hole in a piece of glass, which, as he was much interested about it, I
promised to show him on the earliest opportunity.

Finding myself in the workshop of the first instrument maker in
Bologna, and observing the few tools I wanted, I thought it a good
opportunity to explain the process to my friend; but I could only do
this by applying to the master for the loan of some tools. I also
thought it possible that the method was known to him, and that, having
more practice, he would do the work better than myself.

I therefore mentioned the circumstance of my promise, and asked
the master whether he was acquainted with the process. His reply
was, “Yes; we do it every day.” I then handed over to him the punch
and the piece of glass, declaring that a mere amateur, who only
occasionally practised it could not venture to operate before the first
instrument-maker in Bologna, and in his own workshop.

I had observed a certain shade of surprise glance across the face of
one of the workmen who heard the assertion of this daily practice of
his master’s, and, as I had my doubts of it, I contrived to put him
in such a position that he must either retract his statement or else
attempt to do the trick.

〈AWFUL SMASH.〉

He then called for a flat piece of iron with a small hole in it.
Placing the piece of glass upon the top of this bit of iron, and
holding the punch upon it directly above the {382} aperture, he gave a
strong blow of the hammer, and smashed the glass into a hundred pieces.

I immediately began to console him, remarking that I did not myself
always succeed, and that unaccountable circumstances sometimes defeated
the skill even of the most accomplished workman. I then advised him to
try a larger[52] piece of glass. Just after the crash I had put my hand
upon a heavier hammer, which I immediately withdrew on his perceiving
it. Thus encouraged, he called for a larger piece of glass, and a
bit of iron with a smaller hole in it. In the meantime all the men
in the shop rested from their work to witness this feat of every-day
occurrence. Their master now seized the heavier hammer, which I had
previously just touched. Finding him preparing for a strong and decided
blow, I turned aside my head, in order to avoid seeing him blush—and
also to save my own face from the coming cloud of splinters.

     [52] The larger the piece of glass to be punched the more
     certainly the process succeeds.

I just saw the last triumphant flourish of the heavy hammer waving over
his head, and then heard, on its thundering fall, the crash made by the
thousand fragments of glass which it scattered over the workshop.

I still, however, felt it my duty to administer what consolation I
could to a fellow-creature in distress; so I repeated to him (which was
the truth) that I, too, occasionally failed. Then looking at my watch,
and observing to my companion that these tools were not adapted to my
mode of work, I reminded him that we had a pressing engagement. I then
took leave of this celebrated instrument-maker, with many thanks for
all he had shown me.

After such a misadventure, I thought it would be cruel to {383}
invite him to meet the learned professors who would be assembled at
my evening party, especially as I knew that I should be asked to show
my friends a process with which he had assured me he was so familiar.
The unpretending maker of thermometers and barometers did however join
the party; and the kind and considerate manner in which my guests of
the university and of the city treated him raised both parties in my
estimation.

I will here mention another mode of treating glass, which may
occasionally be found worth communicating.

Ground glass is frequently employed for transmitting light into an
apartment, whilst it effectually prevents persons on the outside from
seeing into the room. Rough plate-glass is now in very common use for
the same purpose. In both these circumstances there is a reciprocity,
for those who are within such rooms cannot see external forms.

〈ROUGH GLASS MADE TRANSPARENT.〉

It may in some cases be desirable partially to remedy this difficulty.
In my own case, I cut with my diamond a small disc of window-glass,
about two inches in diameter, and cemented it with Canada balsam to
the rough side of my rough plate-glass. I then suspended a circular
piece of card by a thread, so as to cover the circular disc. When the
Canada balsam is dry, it fills up all the little inequalities of the
rough glass with a transparent substance, of nearly the same refracting
power; consequently, on drawing aside the suspended card, the forms of
external objects become tolerably well defined.

The smooth surface of the rough plate-glass, not being perfectly flat,
produces a slight distortion, which might, if it were worth while, be
cured by cementing another disc of glass upon that side. In case the
ground glass itself happens to be plate-glass, the image of external
objects is perfect. {384}

Occasionally I met, in the course of my travels, with various things
which, though not connected with my own pursuits, might yet be highly
interesting to others. If the cost suited my purse, and the subject was
easily carried, or the specimen of importance, I have in many instances
purchased them. Such was the case with respect to that curious creature
the _proteus anguineus_, a creature living only in the waters of dark
caverns, which has eyes, but the eyelids cannot open.

〈THE CAVES OF ADELSBURG.〉

When I visited the caves of Adelsburg, in Styria, I inquired whether
any of these singular creatures could be procured. I purchased all I
could get, being six in number. I conveyed them in large bottles full
of river water, which I changed every night. During the greater part of
their journey the bottles were placed in large leathern bags lashed to
the barouche seat of my calash.

The first of these pets died at Vienna, and another at Prague. After
three months, two only survived, and reached Berlin, where they also
died—I fear from my servant having supplied them with water from a well
instead of from a river.

At night they were usually placed in a large wash-hand basin of water,
covered over with a napkin.

They were very excitable under the action of light. On several
occasions when I have visited them at night with a candle, one or more
have jumped out of their watery home.

These rare animals were matters of great interest to many naturalists
whom I visited in my rambles, and procured for me several very
agreeable acquaintances. When their gloomy lives terminated I preserved
them in spirits, and sent the specimens to the collections of our own
universities, to India, and some of our colonies.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I was preparing materials for the ‘Economy of {385}
Manufactures,’ I had occasion to travel frequently through our
manufacturing and mining districts. On these occasions I found the
travellers’ inn or the travellers’ room was usually the best adapted
to my purpose, both in regard to economy and to information. As my
inquiries had a wide range, I found ample assistance in carrying them
on. Nobody doubted that I was one of the craft; but opinions were
widely different as to the department in which I practised my vocation.

In one of my tours I passed a very agreeable week at the Commercial
Hotel at Sheffield. The society of the travellers’ room is very
fluctuating. Many of its frequenters arrive at night, have supper,
breakfast early the next morning, and are off soon after: others make
rather a longer stay. One evening we sat up after supper much later
than is usual, discussing a variety of commercial subjects.

〈GUESSES AT MY VOCATION.〉

When I came down rather late to breakfast, I found only one of my
acquaintance of the previous evening remaining. He remarked that we had
had a very agreeable party last night, in which I cordially concurred.
He referred to the intelligent remarks of some of the party in our
discussion, and then added, that when I left them they began to talk
about me. I merely observed that I felt myself quite safe in their
hands, but should be glad to profit by their remarks. It appeared, when
I retired for the night, they debated about what trade I travelled for.
“The tall gentleman in the corner,” said my informant, “maintained
that you were in the hardware line; whilst the fat gentleman who sat
next to you at supper was quite sure that you were in the spirit
trade.” Another of the party declared that they were both mistaken: he
said he had met you before, and that you were travelling for a great
iron-master. “Well,” said I, “you, I presume, knew my vocation better
than our friends.”—“Yes,” {386} said my informant, “I knew perfectly
well that you were in the Nottingham lace trade.” The waiter now
appeared with his bill, and announced that my friend’s trap was at the
door.

〈THE PHILOSOPHER FOUND OUT.〉

I had passed nearly a week at the Commercial Inn without having broken
the eleventh commandment; but the next day I was doomed to be found
out. A groom, in the gay livery of the Fitzwilliams, having fruitlessly
searched for me at all the great hotels, at last in despair thought
of inquiring for me at the Commercial Hotel. The landlady was sure
I was not staying in her house; but, in deference to the groom’s
urgent request, went to make inquiries amongst her guests. I was the
first person she questioned, and was, of course, obliged to admit the
impeachment. The groom brought a very kind note from the late Lord
Fitzwilliam, who had heard of my being in Sheffield, to invite me to
spend a week at Wentworth.

I gladly availed myself of this invitation, and passed it very
agreeably. During the few first days the party in the house consisted
of the family only. Then followed three days of open house, when their
friends came from great distances, even as far as sixty or eighty
miles, and that at a period when railroads were unknown.

On the great day upwards of a hundred persons sat down to dinner,
a large number of whom slept in the house. This was the first time
the ancient custom of open house had been kept up at Wentworth since
the death of the former Earl, the celebrated Whig Lord Lieutenant of
Yorkshire.

{387}




CHAPTER XXIX.

MIRACLES.


 Difference Engine set so as to follow a given law for a vast period —
 Thus to change to another law of equally vast or of greater duration,
 and so on — Parallel between the successive creations of animal life
 — The Author visited Dublin at the first Meeting of the British
 Association — Is the Guest of Trinity College — Innocently wears a
 Waistcoat of the wrong colour — Is informed of the sad fact — Rushes
 to a Tailor to rectify it — Finds nothing but party-colours — Nearly
 loses his Breakfast, and is thought to be an amazing Dandy — The Dean
 thinks better of the Philosopher, and accompanied him to Killarney —
 The Philosopher preaches a Sermon to the Divine by the side of the
 Lake.

After that portion of the Difference Engine which was completed had
been for some months promoted from the workshop to my drawing-room,
I met two of my friends from Ireland—Dr. Lloyd, the present Provost
of Trinity College, and Dr. Robinson, of Armagh. I invited them to
breakfast, that they might have a full opportunity of examining
its structure. I invited also another friend to meet them—the late
Professor Malthus.

After breakfast we adjourned to the drawing-room. I then proceeded
to explain the mechanism of the Engine, and to cause it to calculate
Tables. One of the party remarked two axes in front of the machine
which had not hitherto been performing any work, and inquired for what
purpose they were so placed. I informed him that these axes had been
so placed in order to illustrate a series of calculations of the {388}
most complicated kind, to which they contributed. I observed that the
Tables thus formed were of so artificial and abstract a nature, that I
could not foresee the time when they would be of any use.

This remark additionally excited their curiosity, and they requested me
to set the machine at work to compute such a table.

Having taken a simple case of this kind, I set the Engine to do its
work, and then told them—

That it was now prepared to count the natural numbers; but that it
would obey this law only as far as the millionth term.

〈LAWS CHANGING AT VERY DISTANT INTERVALS.〉

That after that term it would commence a series, following a different,
but known law, for a very long period.

That after this new law had been fulfilled for another long period, it
would then suddenly abandon it, and calculate the terms of a series
following another new law, and so on throughout all time.

Of course it was impossible to verify these assertions by making the
machine actually go through the calculations; but, after having made
the Engine count the natural numbers for some time, I proceeded to
point out the fact, that it was impossible, by its very structure, that
the machine could record any but the natural numbers before it reached
the number 999,990. This I made evident to my friends, by showing them
the actual structure of the Engine. Having demonstrated this to their
entire satisfaction, I put the machine on to the number 999,990, and
continued to work the Engine, when the result I had predicted soon
arrived. After the millionth term a new law _was_ taken up, and my
friends were convinced that it must, from the very structure of the
machine, continue for a very long time, and then {389} inevitably give
place to another new law, and so on throughout all time.

When they were quite satisfied about this fact, I observed that, in a
new engine which I was then contemplating, it would be possible to set
it so that—

1st. It should calculate a Table for any given length of time,
according to any given law.

2nd. That at the termination of that time it should cease to compute a
Table according to that law; but that it should commence a new Table
according to any other given law that might be desired, and should then
continue this computation for any other given period.

3rd. That this succession of a new law, coming in and continuing during
any desired time, and then giving place to other new laws, in endless
but known succession, might be continued indefinitely.

I remarked that I did not conceive the time ever could arrive when the
results of such calculations would be of any utility. I added, however,
that they offered a striking parallel with, although at an immeasurable
distance from, the successive creations of animal life, as developed
by the vast epochs of geological time. The flash of intellectual
light which illuminated the countenances of my three friends at this
unexpected juxtaposition was most gratifying.

Encouraged by the quick apprehension with which these views had been
accepted, I continued the subject, and pointed out the application of
the same reasoning to the nature of miracles.

The same machine could be set in such a manner that these laws might
exist for any assigned number of times, whether large or small; also,
that it was not necessary that these laws should be different, but
the same law might, when {390} the machine was set, be ordered to
reappear, after any desired interval.

Thus we might suppose an observer watching the machine, to see a known
law continually fulfilled, until after a lengthened period, when a new
law has been appointed to come in. This new law might after a single
instance cease, and the first law might again be restored, and continue
for another interval, when the second new law might again govern the
machine as before for a single instance, and then give place to the
original law.

This property of a mere piece of mechanism may have a parallel in the
laws of human life. That all men die is the result of a vast induction
of instances. That one or more men at given times shall be restored to
life, may be as much a consequence of the law of existence appointed
for man at his creation, as the appearance and reappearance of the
isolated cases of apparent exception in the arithmetical machine.

〈MIRACLES AND PROPHECY.〉

But the workings of machinery run parallel to those of intellect. The
Analytical Engine might be so set, that at definite periods, known
only to its maker, a certain lever might become moveable during the
calculations then making. The consequence of moving it might be to
cause the then existing law to be violated for one or more times, after
which the original law would resume its reign. Of course the maker of
the Calculating Engine might confide this fact to the person using it,
who would thus be gifted with the power of prophecy if he foretold the
event, or of working a miracle at the proper time, if he withheld his
knowledge from those around until the moment of its taking place.

〈SINGULAR POINTS OF CURVES.〉

Such is the analogy between the construction of machinery to calculate
and the occurrence of miracles. A further illustration may be taken
from geometry. Curves are represented {391} by equations. In certain
curves there are portions, such as ovals, disconnected from the rest
of the curve. By properly assigning the values of the constants, these
ovals may be reduced to single points. These singular points may exist
upon a branch of a curve, or may be entirely isolated from it; yet
these points fulfil by then positions the law of the curve as perfectly
as any of those which, by their juxtaposition and continuity, form any
of its branches.

Miracles, therefore, are not the breach of established laws, but they
are the very circumstances that indicate the existence of far higher
laws, which at the appointed time produce their pre-intended results.

In 1835, the British Association visited Dublin. I had been anxious to
promote this visit, from political as well as scientific motives. I had
several invitations to the residences of my friends in that hospitable
country; but I thought I could be of more use by occupying apartments
in Trinity College, which had kindly been placed at my disposal by the
provost and fellows.

After I had enjoyed the college hospitality during three or four days,
I was walking with an intimate friend, who suggested to me that I was
giving great cause of offence to my learned hosts. Not having the
slightest idea how this could have arisen, I anxiously inquired by what
inadvertence I had done so. He observed that it arose from my dress. I
looked at the various articles of my costume with a critical eye, and
could discover nothing exaggerated in any portion of it. I then begged
my friend to explain how I had unconsciously offended in that respect.
He replied, “Your waistcoat is of a bright green.” I became still more
puzzled, until he remarked that I was wearing O’Connell’s colours in
the midst of the Protestant University, whose guest I was. {392}

〈DIFFICULTY OF CHOOSING A DECENT WAISTCOAT.〉

I thanked my friend sincerely, and requested him to accompany me to
my rooms, that I might change the offending waistcoat. My travelling
wardrobe was not large, and, unfortunately, we found in it no entirely
unobjectionable waistcoat. I therefore put on an under-waistcoat with
a light-blue border, and requested him to accompany me to a tailor’s,
that I might choose an inoffensive colour. As I was not to remain
long in Dublin, I wished to select a waistcoat which might do double
service, as not too gay for the morning, and not too dull for the
evening.

On arriving at the tailor’s, he placed before me a profusion of
beautiful silks, which I was assured contained all the newest and most
approved patterns. Out of these I selected ten or a dozen, as best
suiting my own taste. I then requested him to remove from amongst them
any which might be considered as a party emblem. He took each of them
rapidly up, and tossing it to another part of the counter, pronounced
the whole batch to appertain to one party or the other.

Thus limited in my choice, I was compelled to adopt a waistcoat of all
work, of rather gayer colours than good taste would willingly have
selected for morning use. I explained to the knight of the thimble
my dilemma. He swore upon the honour of his order that the finished
waistcoat should be at my rooms in the college punctually as the clock
struck eight the next morning.

During the rest of the day I buttoned up my coat, and the broad
light-blue border of my thin under-waistcoat was alone visible. My
modesty, however, was a little uneasy, lest it should be thought that I
was wearing the decoration of a Guelphic knight.

I rose early the next morning: eight o’clock arrived, but no waistcoat.
The college breakfast in the hall was punctual {393} at a quarter past
eight; 8·20 had arrived, but still no waistcoat. At last, at half-past
eight, the squire of the faithless knight of the thimble arrived with
the vest.

Thus equipped, I rushed to the hall, and found that my college friends
had waited for my arrival. I explained to the Dean[53] that I had been
detained by an unpunctual tailor, who had not brought home my waistcoat
until half an hour after the appointed time. We then commenced the
serious business which assembled us together. The breakfast was superb,
and the society delightful. I enjoyed them both, being fortunately
quite unconscious that every eye was examining the artistic and
æsthetic garment with which I had been so recently invested. I thus
acquired for a time the character of a dandy of the first water. It
has not unfrequently been my fate in life to have gained a character
for worth or worthlessness upon grounds quite as absurd, which I have
afterwards seldom taken the trouble to explain.

     [53] The Rev. S. J. MacLean, Fellow Trin. Coll., Dublin.

The Dean, however, quickly saw through the outer covering, and before
the meeting was over I felt that a friendship had commenced which
time could only strengthen. One day, whilst we were walking together,
MacLean told me that he had heard with great interest from one of his
colleagues of some views of mine relative to miracles, which he wished
much to hear from my own lips.

I remarked that the explanation of them would require much more time
than we could afford during the bustle of the Association; but that I
should afterwards, at any quiet time, be delighted to discuss them with
him.

After the meeting of the British Association terminated, I made a short
tour to visit some of my friends in the North of Ireland. On my return
to Dublin I again found MacLean, {394} and had the good fortune to
enjoy his society in a tour which we took to Killarney.

〈THE AUTHOR PREACHES A SERMON ON THE BANK OF KILLARNEY.〉

One fine morning, as we were walking together, it being Sunday,
MacLean, looking somewhat doubtfully at me, asked whether I had any
objection to go to church. I replied, “None whatever,” and turned
towards the church. Before we reached it an idea occurred to my mind,
and I said, “MacLean, you asked me, in the midst of the bustle at
Dublin, about my views respecting miracles. Have you any objection to
take a walk with me by the side of the lake, and I will give you a
sermon upon that subject.”—“Not the least,” replied my friend; and we
turned immediately towards the banks of that beautiful lake.

I then proceeded to explain that those views of the apparently
successive creations opened out to us by geology are in reality the
fulfilment of one far more comprehensive law. I pointed out that a
miracle, instead of being a violation of a law, is in fact the most
eminent fulfilment of a vast law—that it bears the same relation to an
apparent law that singular points of a curve bear to the visible form
of that curve. My friend inquired whether I had published anything upon
these subjects. On my answering in the negative, he strongly urged
me to do so. I remarked upon the extreme difficulty of making them
intelligible to the public. Reverting again to the singular points
of curves, I observed that the illustration, which in a few words I
had placed before him, would be quite unintelligible even to men of
cultivated minds not familiar with the doctrine of curves.

We had now arrived at a bench, on which we sat. MacLean, wrapt up in
the new views thus opened out to his mind, remained silent for a long
interval. At last, turning towards me, he made these remarks: “How
wonderful it is! Here {395} am I, bound by the duties of my profession
to inquire into the attributes of the Creator; bound still more
strongly by an intense desire to do so; possessing, like yourself, the
same powerful science to aid my inquiries; and yet, within this last
short half hour, you have opened to me views of the Creator surpassing
all of which I have hitherto had any conception!”

These views had evidently made a very deep impression on his mind.
Amidst the beautiful scenery in the South of Ireland he frequently
reverted to the subject; and, having accompanied me to Waterford,
offered to cross the Channel with me if I could spend one single day at
Milford Haven.

Unfortunately, long previous arrangements prevented this delay. I
parted from my friend, who, though thus recently acquired, seemed, from
the coincidence of our thoughts and feelings, to have been the friend
of my youth. I little thought, on parting, that one whom I so much
admired, so highly esteemed, would in a few short months be separated
for ever from the friends who loved him, and from the society he
adorned.

{396}




CHAPTER XXX.

RELIGION.


  “Before thy holy altar, sacred Truth,
   I bow in manhood, as I knelt in youth;
 There let me bend till this frail form decay,
   And my last accents hail thine opening day.”

 The _à priori_ proof of the existence of a Deity — Proof from
 Revelation — Dr. Johnson’s definition of Inspiration — Various
 Meanings assigned to the word ‘Revelation’ — Illustration of
 transmitted Testimony — The third source of proof of the existence
 of a Deity — By an examination of His Works — Effect of hearing the
 Athanasian Creed read for the first time.

There are three sources from which it is stated that man can arrive at
the knowledge of the existence of a Deity.

 1. The _à priori_ or metaphysical proof. Such is that of Dr. Samuel
 Clarke.

 2. From Revelation.

 3. From the examination of the works of the Creator.

1. The first of these, the _à priori_ proof, is of such a nature that
it can only be apprehended in a high state of civilization, and then
only by the most intellectual. Even amongst that very limited class it
does not, as an argument, command universal assent.

2. The argument deduced from revelation is advanced in many countries
and for several different forms of faith. {397} When it is sincerely
adopted it deserves the most respectful examination. It must, however,
on the other hand, be submitted to the most scrutinizing inquiry. As
long as the believer in any form of revelation maintains it by evidence
or by argument, it is only by such means that it ought to be questioned.

〈WILFUL ABUSE OF LANGUAGE.〉

When, however, professed believers dare to throw doubt upon the motives
of those whose arguments they are unable to refute, and still more,
when, availing themselves of the imperfections of language, they apply
to their opponents epithets which they can defend in one sense but
know will be interpreted in another—when they speak of an adversary
as a disbeliever, because, though he believes in the same general
revelation, he doubts the accuracy of certain texts, or believes in a
different interpretation of others—when they apply the term infidel,
meaning thereby a disbelief in their _own_ view of revelation, but
knowing that it will be understood as disbelief in a Deity,—then it is
at least allowable to remind them that they are richly paid for the
support of their own doctrines, whilst those they revile have no such
motives to influence or to mislead their judgment.

Before, however, we enter upon that great question it is necessary to
observe that belief is not a voluntary operation. Belief is the result
of the influence of a greater or less preponderance of evidence acting
upon the human mind.

It ought also to be remarked that the word revelation assumes, as a
fact, that a Being exists from whom it proceeds; whilst, on the other
hand, the existence of a Deity is possible without any revelation.

〈INSPIRATION.〉

The first question that arises is the meaning of the word revelation.
In its ordinary acceptation it is said to be a direct communication
from the Deity to an individual human {398} being. Dr. Johnson
remarks:—“Inspiration is when an overpowering impression of any
propositions is made upon the mind by God himself, that gives a
convincing and indubitable evidence of the truth and divinity of it.”
Be it so; but then, as such, it is not revelation to any _other_ human
being. All others receive it from the statement of the person to
whom the revelation was vouchsafed. To all others its truth depends
entirely on human testimony. Now in a certain sense all our faculties
being directly given to us by the Supreme Being might be said to be
revelations. But this is clearly not the religious meaning of the word.
In the latter sense it is a direct special communication of knowledge
to one or more persons which is not given to the rest of the race.

Before any person can admit the truth of a revelation asserted by
another, he must have clearly established in his own mind what evidence
he would require to believe in a special revelation to himself.

But when he communicates this revelation to his fellow-creatures that
which may truly be a revelation to him is not revelation to them. It is
to them merely human testimony, which they are bound to examine more
strictly from its abnormal nature.

Let us now suppose that this believer in his own special revelation
offers to work a miracle in proof of the truth of his doctrine, and
even, further, that he does perform a miracle. Those who witness it
have now before them far higher evidence of inspiration than that of
the prophet’s testimony. They have the evidence of their own senses
that an act contrary to the ordinary laws of nature has been performed.

But even here the amount of conviction will be influenced by the state
of knowledge the spectator of the miracle {399} himself possesses of
the laws of nature which he _believes_ he has thus seen violated.[54]

〈REVELATION.〉

Granting him, however, the most profound knowledge, the evidence
influencing his own mind will be inferior to that which acts upon the
mind of the inspired worker of the miracle. If there are more witnesses
than one thus qualified, this will to a certain extent augment the
evidence, although a large number might not give it a proportional
addition of weight.

     [54] I have adopted in the text that view of the nature of
     miracles which prevailed many years ago. In 1838, I published, in
     the “Ninth Bridgewater Treatise,” my own views on those important
     subjects—the nature of miracles and of prophecy. Those opinions
     have been received and adopted by many of the most profound
     thinkers of very different religious opinions.

It would be profane to compare evidence derived directly from the
Almighty, which must necessarily be irresistible, with the testimony
of man, which must always be carefully weighed by taking into account
the state of his knowledge, his prejudices, his interests, and his
truthfulness. On the other hand, it would lead to endless confusion,
and be destructive to all reasoning on the subject, to apply the same
word ‘Revelation’ to things so different in their nature as—

 The immediate act of the Deity.

 The impression produced by that act on the mind of the person inspired.

 The description of it given by him in the language of the people he
 addressed.

 The record made of his description by those who heard it.

 The transmission of this through various languages and people to the
 present day.

We have now arrived at the highest external evidence man can have—the
declaration of inspiration by the prophet, {400} supported by an
admitted miracle performed before competent witnesses, to prove the
truth of his inspiration.

〈TRANSMITTED TESTIMONY.〉

But to all who were not present, the evidence of this is entirely
dependent on the truth and even upon the accuracy of _human testimony_.

At every step of its transmission it undergoes some variation in the
words in which it is related; and without the least want of good faith
at any stage, the mere imperfection of language will necessarily
vary the terms by which it is described. Even when written language
has conveyed it to paper as a MSS., there may be several different
manuscripts by different persons. Even in the extraordinary case of two
MSS. agreeing perfectly there remains a perpetual source of doubt as
to the exact interpretation arising from the continually fluctuating
meaning of the words themselves.

Few persons who have not reflected deeply, or had a very wide
experience, are at all aware of the errors arising from this source.

〈RUSSIAN SCANDAL.〉

There is a game occasionally played in society which eminently
illustrates the value of testimony transmitted with the most perfect
good faith through a succession of truthful persons. It is called
Russian Scandal, and is thus played:—

One of the party writes a short simple tale, perhaps a single anecdote.
The original composer of the tale, whom we will call A, retires into
another room with B, to whom he communicates it. A then returns to the
party, and sends in C, who is told by B the tale he had just learnt.
B then returns to the party and sends in D, who is informed of the
anecdote by C, and so on until the story has been transmitted through
twelve educated and truthful witnesses.

The twelfth then relates to the whole party the story he has just
heard: after that the original written document is read. {401} The wit
or fun of the transmitted story is invariably gone, and nothing but an
unmeaning platitude generally remains.

One very interesting case occurred a few years ago in which the wit of
the original story had evidently been lost, but had afterwards been
revived in a different form in the latter part of its transmission. The
story at starting consisted of the following anecdote:—

The Duke of Rutland and Theodore Hook having dined with the Lord
Mayor, were looking for their hats previously to their departure. The
Duke, unable to find his own, said to his friend: “Hook, I have lost
my castor.” The Lord Chief Baron, Sir Frederick Pollock, was at that
moment passing down the stairs. Hook perceiving him, replied instantly,
“Never mind, take Pollock’s” (Pollux).

The story told at the conclusion, after a dozen transmissions, was
thus:—

Theodore Hook and the Duke of Rutland were dining with the Bishop of
Oxford. Both being equally incapable of finding their respective hats,
the Duke said to the wit, “Hook, you have stolen my castor.” “No,”
replied the prince of jokers, “I haven’t stolen your castor, but I
should have no objection to take your beaver;” alluding to Belvoir
Castle, the splendid seat of the Duke of Rutland, which in the language
of the clay is pronounced precisely in the same way as the name of that
animal whom man robs of his great-coat in order to make a covering for
his own skull.

It requires considerable training to become an accurate witness of
facts. No two persons, however well trained, ever express, in the same
form of words, the series of facts they have both observed.

       *       *       *       *       *

〈THE BELIEF IN THE CREATOR FROM HIS WORKS.〉

3. There remains a third source from which we arrive at {402} the
knowledge of the existence of a supreme Creator, namely, from _an
examination of his works_. Unlike transmitted testimony, which is
weakened at every stage, this evidence derives confirmation from the
progress of the individual as well as from the advancement of the
knowledge of the race.

Almost all thinking men who have studied the laws which govern the
animate and the inanimate world around us, agree that the belief in
the existence of one Supreme Creator, possessed of infinite wisdom and
power, is open to far less difficulties than the supposition of the
absence of _any_ cause, or of the existence of a _plurality_ of causes.

In the _works_ of the Creator ever open to our examination, we possess
a firm basis on which to raise the superstructure of an enlightened
creed. The more man inquires into the laws which regulate the
material universe, the more he is convinced that all its varied forms
arise from the action of a few simple principles. These principles
themselves converge, with accelerating force, towards some still more
comprehensive law to which all matter seems to be submitted. Simple as
that law may possibly be, it must be remembered that it is only one
amongst an infinite number of simple laws: that each of these laws has
consequences at least as extensive as the existing one, and therefore
that the Creator who selected the present law must have foreseen the
consequences of all other laws.

The _works_ of the Creator, ever present to our senses, give a living
and perpetual testimony of his power and goodness far surpassing any
evidence transmitted through human testimony. The testimony of man
becomes fainter at every stage of transmission, whilst each new inquiry
into the works of the Almighty gives to us more exalted views of his
wisdom, his goodness, and his power. {403}

〈THE ATHANASIAN CREED.〉

When I was between sixteen and seventeen years of age, I heard, or
rather I attended, for the first time, to the words of the Athanasian
Creed. I felt the utmost disgust at the direct contradiction in
terms which its words implied; and during several weeks I recurred,
at intervals, to the Prayer-Book to assure myself that I rightly
remembered its singular and self-contradictory assertions. On inquiry
amongst my seniors, I was assured that it was all true, and that it was
part of the Christian religion, and that it was most wicked to doubt
a single sentence of it. Whereupon I was much alarmed, seeing that I
found it absolutely impossible to believe it, and consequently, if it
were an essential dogma, I clearly did not belong to that faith.

In the course of my inquiries, I met with the work upon the Trinity,
by Dr. Samuel Clarke. This I carefully examined, and although very
far from being satisfied, I ceased from further inquiry. This change
arose probably from my having acquired the much more valuable work of
the same author, on the Being and Attributes of God. This I studied,
and felt that its doctrine was much more intelligible and satisfactory
than that of the former work. I may now state, as the result of a long
life spent in studying the _works_ of the Creator, that I am satisfied
they afford far more satisfactory and more convincing proofs of the
existence of a supreme Being than any evidence transmitted through
human testimony can possibly supply.

If I were to express my opinion of the Athanasian Creed merely from my
experience of the motives and actions of mankind, I should say that
it was written by a clever, but most unscrupulous person, who did not
believe one syllable of the doctrine,—that he purposely asserted and
reiterated propositions which contradict each other in terms, in order
that {404} in after and more enlightened times, he should not be
supposed to have believed in the religion which he had, from worldly
motives, adopted.

The Athanasian Creed is a direct contradiction in terms: if three
things can be one thing, then the whole science of arithmetic is at
once annihilated, and those wonderful laws, which, as astronomers have
shown, govern the solar system, are mere dreams. If, on the other hand,
it is attempted to be shown that there may be some mystic sense in
which three and one are the same thing, then all language through which
alone man can exert his reasoning faculty becomes useless, because it
contradicts itself and is untrue.[55]

     [55] See Appendix, Note B.

〈THE BASIS OF VIRTUE IS TRUTH.〉

The great basis of virtue in man is _truth_—that is, the constant
application of the same word to the same thing.

The first element of accurate knowledge is _number_—the foundation and
the measure of all he knows of the material world.

I believe these views of the Athanasian Creed are by no means
singular,—that they are indeed very generally held, although very
rarely asserted. If such is the case, it were wise to take the
opportunity which the new Commission for the revision of the Liturgy
presents, to remove from the Rubric doctrines so thoroughly destructive
of all true religion, and about which the author, doubtless in mockery,
so complacently tells us, that whosoever does not believe them “without
doubt, he shall perish everlastingly.”

The true value of the Christian religion rests, not upon speculative
views of the Creator, which must _necessarily_ be different in each
individual, according to the extent of the knowledge of the finite
being, who employs his own feeble powers in contemplating the infinite:
but it rests upon those {405} doctrines of kindness and benevolence
which that religion claims and enforces, not merely in favour of man
himself, but of every creature susceptible of pain or of happiness.

〈IDENTITY DEPENDS ON MEMORY.〉

A curious reflection presents itself when we meditate upon a state of
rewards and punishments in a future life. We must possess the memory of
what we did during our existence upon this earth in order to give them
those characteristics.

In fact, memory seems to be the only faculty which must of necessity be
preserved in order to render a future state possible.

If memory be absolutely destroyed, our personal identity is lost.

Further reflection suggests that in a future state we may, as it were,
awake to the recollection that, previously to this our present life,
we existed in some former state, possibly in many former ones, and
that the then state of existence may have been the consequences of our
conduct in those former stages.

It would be a very interesting research if naturalists could devise any
means of showing that the dragon-fly, in its three stages of a grub
beneath the soil—an animal living in the water—and that of a flying
insect—had in the last stage any memory of its existence in its first.

Another question connected with this subject offers still greater
difficulty. Man possesses five sources of knowledge through his senses.
He proudly thinks himself the highest work of the Almighty Architect;
but it is quite _possible_ that he may be the very lowest. If other
animals possess senses of a different nature from ours, it can scarcely
be possible that we could ever be aware of the fact. Yet those animals,
having other sources of information and of pleasure, might, though
despised by us, yet enjoy a corporeal as well as an intellectual
existence far higher than our own.

{406}




CHAPTER XXXI.

A VISION.


How, when, and where this vision occurred it is unnecessary for me at
present to state. It did not arise under the action of the laughing-gas
or of chloroform, but by some much more real and immediate spiritual
action. I had no perception of body or of matter, yet I felt that I
was in the presence of a reasoning being of a different order from
man. Language was not the means of our communication; yet it became
necessary, in order to be intelligible, when I wrote down the facts
immediately after that singular event—but language itself is quite
insufficient to give an adequate idea of its immense apparent duration.

The first difficulty I felt in this communion with an unearthly Spirit
was the notion of space. Our views of it differed widely. On many
points, as, for instance, measure, we apprehended each other perfectly,
for each referred to the height of an individual of his own race—of
course about six feet. At last I discovered that my idea of space,
which was founded upon vacuity, was exactly the reverse of that of the
Spirit, which was based upon solidity. I will now, as far as I can,
place before my reader the information I received.

〈THE CONSEQUENCES OF DOUBT.〉

The first desire I expressed to the Spirit was to learn, if possible,
his view of the origin of all things. He stated that {407} the records
of his race, which he declared was the highest in creation, went back,
with great certainty, for myriads of years before all other created
beings: that previously to this, their history was somewhat obscure,
but had recently been placed upon a much surer footing by some of their
most prominent Spirits.

(_a._) In the beginning all space was fluid—apparently one universal
whitish liquid extended in all directions through what we should call
space; so I thought at first that this might have some relation to
the “milky way.” Its temperature was considerable; and in about every
thousand years a torrent of this fluid, of a still higher temperature,
passed through space with a kind of gushing rush. It was peopled by
myriads of happy spirits floating about in it.

After long ages of happiness a dispute arose between two Spirits as to
the possibility of the existence of matter under any other form than
that of a fluid. The Power which controlled their destiny, justly angry
at their presumption, threw into the fluid a very small piece of what,
as far as I could understand, was like organic matter.

(_b._) The effect was astounding: all the fluid in contact with this
intrusive piece of matter gradually lost its fluidity, and a new state
of matter or of space arose which had been unknown in all past time.
The change advanced slowly but certainly, on every side of the intruded
matter. In its new form, as far as I could make out, space became
elastic gelatinous matter. The two quarrelsome Spirits were the first
to be surrounded in it. None in the immediate presence of this new kind
of space could move away, and absorption went on rapidly imprisoning
millions of beings.

A great controversy arose as to the state of those embedded in the
jelly. Some supposed that they were miserably squeezed, {408} and
maintained that they deserved to be thoroughly wretched. Whilst others
asserted, that being entirely relieved from movement, theirs must be
a state of perfect blessedness, their whole faculties being absorbed
in contemplation. In the midst of these discussions the process of
jellification was advancing more and more rapidly, and in ten thousand
years the whole of infinite fluidity throughout all space, with all its
myriads of Beings embedded in it, was transformed into this new form
of space. From the description conveyed to me by the Spirit, I should
infer that the whole of what we call infinite space had now become more
nearly like _blancmange_ than any other sub-aërial substance.

〈SPACE TOO LARGE FOR ITSELF.〉

(_c._) After a state of repose of many hundred thousand years a new
catastrophe occurred. Space became too large even for itself. It then
suffered, for many hundred thousand years, enormous compression. During
this long period all its embedded Spirits perished, and space itself,
during six hundred thousand years, became one vast and solid desert,
containing no living beings.

But the vast periods of the past were as nothing compared with the long
series of cycles which now succeeded—each in itself comprising millions
of years.

About this time recorded history began, and is believed, by the Spirit
with whom I was in conference, to be as authentic as the nature of the
circumstances admit.

One solitary survivor seems to have escaped the crash of systems and
the condensation of space. He proceeded to cut himself into two parts,
and to advise each part to follow out the same course, directing them
to transmit the command of their first parent throughout all time.
Alone, in the midst of infinite solidity, the newly-severed beings,
setting themselves back to back, exerted force. Thus urged, matter
itself gave {409} way, and they occupied an elongated hollow space.
Then again bisecting themselves, they further lengthened the path.
After ten thousand years they began to exert their energies in the
transverse directions of that path, and thus widened it. The race
then began to form chambers, each for himself, into which he might
retire for abstruse calculations, the nature of which seemed almost
beyond the remotest reach of utility, although not beyond the power of
the Analytical Engine. Thus vast cities, as it were, became formed,
penetrating in every direction through solid space.

(_d._) After millions of years of industry quietness and calculations,
a most extraordinary catastrophe occurred. It was with the greatest
difficulty that I could discover its nature, or how to explain it
in ordinary language. The nearest approach I can make towards its
explanation is this:—It seemed, from what my spiritual informant
communicated, that the whole universe was lifted up bodily, and then
borne rapidly back with a great shock, thus disarranging everything,
and destroying millions of their race.

〈CONVERSION OF ATTICS INTO CELLARS.〉

But the most incomprehensible part of this historic narration was, that
on the survivors recovering their senses, they found that everything
which had formerly been on their right hand was now on their left. They
also observed, to their still greater dismay, that every abode in the
universe was turned topsy-turvy, so that the surviving philosophers,
who had retired to their attics to study, suddenly found themselves in
their cellars.

I have conveyed, as carefully as the nature of the subject admits, the
impressions this relation made upon me, sometimes assisted in my slow
apprehensions by another unembodied Spirit, whom, to distinguish from
the relator, I shall call Mathesis. {410}

〈THE TRUE USE OF FIGURES.〉

Whenever a man can get hold of numbers, they are invaluable: if
correct, they assist in informing his own mind, but they are still more
useful in deluding the minds of others. Numbers are the masters of
the weak, but the slaves of the strong. I therefore earnestly pressed
for more exact information as to the possible number of years; but it
appeared beyond the Spirit’s power to estimate it, even within a few
millions. He mentioned incidentally that the last vast period he had
just described was merely one of many others of similar extent: also,
that though these periods were not actually equal, the difference,
which even in extreme cases only reached a hundred thousand years, was
not worth considering.

To gratify my longing desire for information on this most important
subject, the Spirit proceeded to inform me that their histories
recorded a large number of these successive catastrophes, and that they
were succeeded by a new and more terrible one, which he was proceeding
to explain, when I interrupted him by asking for an approximate
estimate of their number. Aware of my anxious desire for numerical
accuracy, he said he could, in this one instance, gratify it fully.
“If there is,” said my informant, “any one point better established
than all others, it is that there had occurred exactly one hundred and
twenty-one of these avatars of destruction.”

I now felt as if I had discovered one solitary fixed point in the vast
chaos of time. My guide described to me that, after the termination
of this system of one hundred and twenty-one cycles, a new and more
terrific system of events followed each other.

First, however, he said he must mention an interregnum, irregular in
its progress, but still of vast duration; {411} in fact, some of his
race had been able to prove that it occupied at least three times as
long as any one of those just described.

〈VARIOUS SHAKES AND SMASHES.〉

(_e._) It commenced by a motion very like that to which space itself
had been submitted at the end of each avatar, finishing with a smash,
and followed by a period of repose of about ten thousand years. It
however differed from those avatars inasmuch as there was no inversion
of the position of cellar and attic.

(_f._) A new form of shaking of universal solid space now arose, much
more frequent but less destructive than the former. It occurred about
once in two years, and was repeated many hundred thousand times.

(_g._) Again a period exactly similar to that recorded in (_e_)
occurred.

(_h._) This was followed by a long series of movements of all solidity,
approaching, as far as I could understand it, to an oscillating or wave
motion. This continued without intermission during exactly three of
those cycles whose precise number had been preserved.

(_i._) During the whole of this period there was a great destruction
of the race. A universal sickness arose and continued more or less, so
that multitudes actually perished, and those who escaped could scarcely
carry on the ordinary calculations necessary for their existence.

(_j._) Another period followed, ending with a smash excessively like
(_e_).

(_k._) Then followed a period of shaking like that in (_f_).

(_l._) Then another smash like (_e_).

(_m._) Period of long repose.

After this came a long state of absolute rest.

Such was the dawn of the most terrible, as well as the {412} most
recent, of these vast changes in the universe which had been so well
related by my ethereal guide.

〈A COMMISSION SENT TO EXPLORE.〉

(_n._) The temperature of the universe had been uniform throughout
many millions of years: it now began to change in different isolated
places. Increased cold in some parts drove the inhabitants from their
dwellings. This was followed by torrents of invisible air, bringing
infection and death to millions of their race. Public opinion was
roused, and their academies of science and of arts were urged to devise
a remedy. An expedition was sent by their school of Science and of
Geology to endeavour to trace the origin of this plague.

The Commission, after long investigation, reported that they had
penetrated solid space in their usual way, putting each other back to
back, and pressing the foremost forward. It also stated that one of
them had invented a method of arrangement of the members in a kind of
wedge form, which they found much more effective for their object.
The result of this, however, was that the leader of the column got so
many squeezes, that all their best Spirits declined a position for
which coarser animals were better fitted. Consequently, most of their
Presidents of scientific bodies were selected from what we should call
the “_Demi-monde_” of science.

The first report of this Commission stated that, after penetrating
space (by pushing) through many thousand miles, they had reached the
cause of all the evil. They had ascertained that it arose from the fact
they had discovered,—that space itself was discontinuous:—that they had
reached a spot where there was a kind of chasm in it, into which some
of them tumbled, and were with difficulty extricated:—in fact, they
reported that it was only necessary to send proper persons to fill up
this chasm in order to restore the universe to health. {413}

〈WELL FED AND WELL PAID ON RETURN.〉

Great rejoicings were made on the return of this Commission. Public
meetings were held, speeches were made, papers were read, and medals
were lavished. Those who had interest used their services on this
committee to justify their promotion, each in his own different line.
Those who had no interest as well as those who had, were anointed daily
during twelve months with what I can but very imperfectly describe by
calling it _lip-salve_. All this while they were fed at the public
expense with _royal food_, which was highly coveted; but as far as I
could make out, its taste must have been somewhat intermediate between
rancid butter and flummery. Whatever this may have been, they relished
it highly, and in truth it seems to have been well suited to their
organs of digestion.

Time, however, went on; the pestilence increased. Strange reports
arose: first, that space itself was decaying; then, that there existed
somewhere in decayed space an immense dragon whose breath produced the
pestilence, and who swallowed up thousands of Spirits at each mouthful.

Another Commission was sent, with instructions to fill up the hole
in space. This was supposed to be a great step in advance. Having
penetrated a very short distance beyond the celebrated chasm, they
found another just like it, and on the same level. They found the
first chasm slightly curved, which had indeed been remarked by an
unpretending member of the former Commission: but so simple a remark
was not thought worth reporting. The second chasm also was found
slightly curved, but its curvature was in an opposite direction,
presenting rudely the appearance of two parentheses, thus (    ).
Upon this discovery the Commission were inclined to return and report
that a series of chasms occurred in advance of the first, and that it
would be useless—indeed, {414} that it would be highly dangerous—to
open more chasms. One of the most modest of the Commissioners, who
had been snubbed on the former occasion, suggested, however, that
these slightly-curved chasms might possibly be portions of some vast
circular crack: an idea which was ridiculed as a wild hypothesis by the
chairman, quizzed by the secretary, and laughed at by all the rest.
Fortunately they were persuaded to excavate a few yards more on the
second vertical chasm or crack, when it became probable that the single
dissentient was right. It soon became certain, and before half the
circle had been uncovered, each member of the commission thought he had
himself been the first to discover its circular shape.

〈THE MODEL CHAIRMAN.〉

But the chairman was a person of large experience. He quietly left the
Commissioners to fight amongst themselves about the discovery of the
circle, and if they chose, even about its quadrature. On his return,
however, he reported that from some very extensive calculations of
his own he had anticipated an elliptic cavity; that he had directed
the attention of the Commissioners to the subject; and that they had
succeeded in verifying his prediction. He also stated that the same
theory led him to the knowledge of the fact, that in certain cases the
ellipse might approach very nearly to a circle, although it could never
actually reach it, whilst on the other hand it might become so flat
as to approach a straight line—an approximation to which nobody ever
suggested that the chairman himself could have attained. The chairman
then, with singular modesty, alluding in his report to one of his
colleagues possessing high rank, great influence and a very moderate
knowledge of science, remarked that it was fortunate for him (the
chairman) that that distinguished member had been so fully occupied
with much more valuable {415} investigations, otherwise he would
certainly have anticipated the important discovery it had fallen to his
own lot to make.

〈THE COMMISSIONERS OUT-MANŒUVRED.〉

In the meantime the Commissioners, who had each wished to appropriate
to himself the discovery of the circle, _now_ thought that this
usurpation of it by their chairman was most unjust towards the
unpretending member who had really made it. They therefore advised him
to claim his own discovery, and promised to back him in asserting it.

But their chairman really was a _clever fellow_,[56] and deep as
Silurian rocks. Aware of the importance of the discovery thus
appropriated, he had already visited the modest Commissioner—had
overwhelmed him with compliments, and had also prevailed upon that
other influential Commissioner whom he had so well buttered in his
Report, to give him a small piece of preferment, which had been
accepted by his victim:—thus putting a padlock upon his lips, which his
brother Commissioners were unable either to unlock or to pick.

     [56] A _clever fellow_ may occasionally snatch our applause; but a
     _clever man_ can alone command our respect.

After the Report was presented, more speeches were made—more medals
given, but the plague continued, and their universe was depopulated.

A third Commission was afterwards sent, who reported that they found
at the spot previously reached, on either side, two vast circles,
the diameter of each of which was one hundred times the height of an
ordinary individual; that the material occupying space within the
circle differed slightly from that without it; and that it appeared as
if a vast cylinder of space had been pushed through without disturbing
the matter external to it. They also reported that the former
Commissioners had never approached the origin of the mischief, but had
simply worked their way, at right angles, to a {416} line which might
terminate in it at the distance of a thousand miles, more or less,
either on the right or on the left hand of the point they had reached.

〈DISTURBED VISION.〉

At this moment a sound like the roll of distant thunder recalled me to
this lower world, and interrupted my interesting communion with the
world of Spirits. That noise arose from the chimes of the cathedral
clock. Spending a few days at Salisbury, I had wandered into the
cathedral, and being much fatigued, had selected the luxurious pew of
the Dean as a place of temporary rest. Reposing on elastic cushions,
with my head resting on an eider-down pillow, the vision I have related
had taken place.

On removing the pillow I observed a small piece of matter beneath it.
This, upon examination, turned out to be a morsel of decayed Gloucester
cheese. The whole vision was now very clearly explained. The verger had
evidently retired to the most commodious pew to eat his dinner, and had
inadvertently left the small bit of cheese upon the very spot I had
selected for my temporary repose. It was clear that my Spirit had been
put, _en rapport_, with the soul of a mite, one of the most cultivated
of his race.

If the reader will glance over the following brief explanation, he will
be fully convinced that my solution of this vision is the true one.

_Parallel Passages in the Creation of the Universe and in the Birth and
Education of a Gloucester Cheese._

 References.

 _a._ Milk gushing into the milk-pail at the rate of twenty gushes per
 minute. Alternations of greater and less heat.

 _b._ Rennet being thrown in, the milk curdles.

 _c._ Curds compressed into cheese. {417}

 _d._ Cheese turned over daily during 121 days.

 A few minutes’ difference in the time of the dairyman’s attendance to
 perform this operation made the days slightly unequal.

 _e._ Cheese lifted up and pitched into a cart.

 _f._ Cheese _jolted_ in cart during half a day on its way to to be
 shipped at Gloucester.

 _g._ Cheese pitched from cart into ship.

 _h._ Ship sails with the cheese for Southampton.

 _i._ The motion of the waves makes the mites sea-sick for three days.
 Multitudes die.

 _j._ Cheese taken from ship and pitched into a cart; as in the period
 _e_.

 _k._ Cheese conveyed in cart to cheesemonger at Salisbury—the mites
 dreadfully _jolted_,

 _l._ Cheese pitched into cheesemonger’s shop, as in _e_.

 _m._ Long period of repose of the cheese on the cheesemonger’s shelf.

 _n._ A cylindrical cavity made and piece taken out for a customer to
 taste. Portion of cylinder replaced. Air being let in, a part of the
 cheese becomes rotten, in which large worms are produced, giving rise
 to the story of the dragon.

〈EXPLANATION.〉

In order to discover the month in which the cheese was made, I remarked
that, since it was turned over on its shelf in the cheese-room exactly
121 times, it must have been first placed there in some month which,
together with the three succeeding months, had a number of days exactly
equal to 121. {418}

〈CALCULATION.〉

I then computed the following Table:—

_Table of the number of Days contained in each four months, commencing
on the first day of each month and ending on the last day of the fourth
following month._

                             Number
                            of Days.
 1 January to 30 April        120
 1 February to 31 May         120
 1 March to 30 June           122
 1 April to 31 July           122
 1 May to 31 August           123
 1 June to 30 September       122
 1 July to 31 October         123
 1 August to 30 November      122
 1 September to 31 December   122
 1 October to 31 January      123
 1 November to 28 February    120
 1 December to 31 March       121

Now, from the preceding Table it appears that there is only one month
in the year fulfilling this condition, namely, the month of March. It
follows, therefore, that the cheese must have been made four months
before, that is, in the month of December.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shortly after this vision I received a visit from that great geologist,
the erudite Professor Ponderdunder,[57] a member of all existing
Academies, and Secretary of the most celebrated How-and-wi Academy
for the _Reconstruction of Primeval Time_. I was anxious to have the
opinion of this learned person upon my recent experience: but he was
evidently envious of my vision, which he treated disrespectfully.
{419} Possessed of an intellect which was anything but precocious,
I had with much labour at last made him apprehend the arithmetic by
which I had discovered the exact month of December in the date of the
great series of 121 cataclysms, and I felt much mortified that he did
not appreciate my ingenuity. All of a sudden he seemed intuitively to
perceive the use that might be made of this vision. He then asked me
with great earnestness whether I had communicated this new method of
reasoning to any other person. On my answering in the negative, he
entreated me not to say a word about it. He was especially anxious that
Gardner Wilkinson, Layard, and Rawlinson should not get hold of it,
lest they might anticipate the discovery which it would enable him to
complete. He assured me that he could, by visiting Nineveh, and taking
the Pyramids and Jericho on his road, with the aid of my formula,
restore the true chronology from the creation.

     [57] Author of the celebrated Treatise “On the Entity of Space,”
     the basis of all _sound_ metaphysical reasoning.

〈THE LEARNED PONDERDUNDER STARTS FOR JERICHO.〉

Having given him this promise, he left me, and immediately telegraphed
to a very influential friend, the Vice-President who _managed_ the
How-and-wi Academy, suggesting that not a moment should be lost in
authorizing him to set out on this expedition, which although painfully
laborious to himself personally and not without peril, he was willing
to undertake for the glory of the Academy, and from the religious
conviction that it would enable him to refute the frightful heresy of
Bishop Colenso. Within twenty-four hours the faithful telegraph brought
him back the order to start and the credit necessary for his equipment.
He soon completed the latter, and was _en route_ within the time I have
mentioned.

It is with deep regret I have now to state, that just ten days after
the active Secretary had started on his pious mission, I discovered
that my reasoning about the month of December with all its consequences
was completely vitiated {420} by not having taken into consideration
the existence of leap years, in which case the magic number 121 occurs
in no less than four cases; so that nothing at all is decided by it.

I can only add my hope that, if any of my readers should become
acquainted with the whereabouts of the learned Ponderdunder, he would
kindly communicate by electric telegraph this painful intelligence to
that energetic traveller.

I have subsequently been informed that Professor Ponderdunder’s
honorarium is only £800 a-year, and the payment of all travelling
expenses. The former is doubled upon dangerous travel. I was told
that he also enjoys a snug sinecure of considerable value recently
instituted in his own country; being at the head of the department
for the promotion of “_Small Science and Low Art_.” The family of
the Ponderdunders possess the peculiar gift of manipulating learned
bodies. The Flowery—Rhetorical, and the Zoo-Ethnological Societies
barely escaped perdition under their costly autocracy. I regret also
to add, (but truth forbids me to conceal the interesting fact) that
Ponderdunder is _not_ a member of _all_ existing academies as his
visiting card indicated.

On searching the list of the members of the Roman Academy “Dei
Lynxcii,” I find that he is not a Lynx. This, the oldest of European
academies, originally existed in the time of Galileo. About a quarter
of a century ago I had the honour of receiving its diploma.

{421}




CHAPTER XXXII.

VARIOUS REMINISCENCES.


_On Preventing the Forgery of Bank-Notes._

In 1836 imitations of bank-notes were so easily made, and the forgeries
so numerous, that the Directors of the Bank of England resolved on
appointing a small committee to examine the subject, and advise them
upon a remedy.

The Governor of the Bank wrote to ask me whether I would consent to
act upon that committee. Not being myself a professional engineer, I
entertained some doubts whether my presence would be agreeable to the
profession. Having consulted Sir Isambard Brunel and the late Mr. Bryan
Donkin, who had been also applied to, they both pressed me to join them
in the inquiry.

We examined the existing means of preventing forgery, which were
certainly very defective. The system of the Bank of Ireland which had
recently been greatly improved, was then discussed. Not many months
before, I had carefully examined the whole plan at Dublin. After a full
deliberation on the subject, I drew up our Report, which unanimously
recommended its adoption. The identity of the steel plates from which
the bank-notes were to be printed was secured by Perkins’s plan of
multiplying the number of such plates by impressing them all from one
roll of hardened steel.

This plan answered its purpose fully at that time. It has, {422}
however, been superseded within the last few years. I had, through the
kindness of the late Governor of the Bank of England, an opportunity
of examining their most recent improvement. The discovery of the
process of making fac-similes of a wood engraving, by means of the
electro-chemical deposit of copper, has now enabled the Bank to return
to the more rapid process of surface printing.

It is probable, from the great progress of the mechanical arts, that
these periods for revising methods of preventing forgery will occur at
more frequent intervals.

I derived great pleasure from being permitted, as an amateur, to
join in this interesting inquiry with my professional friends, whose
knowledge and character I highly valued.

Subsequently I received the unexpected gratification of a vote of
thanks from the Governor and Company of the Bank of England—an honour
usually reserved for warriors and statesmen.


_An Émeute._

On one of my visits to Paris I had the pleasure of dining at the Bank
of France. During dinner, in the midst of an interesting conversation,
the Chairman received a note: having glanced over it he put it down by
his side on the table.

On the occurrence of a pause in the conversation, thinking the note
might possibly require an immediate reply, I inquired whether such was
the case. “No,” said my host, “it is of no consequence. It is only an
émeute;” which he then informed me was occurring in a distant part of
Paris.


_Letters of Credit._

Letters of credit are specially addressed to certain bankers at various
places with whom your own banker is in correspondence. {423}

〈THE AUTHOR IN WANT OF CASH.〉

It has on several occasions happened to me to want cash either for
myself or to accommodate some friend at places where my own letters
were not addressed to any firm. At Frankfort I made a purchase of
books. I had a certain amount of the usual circular letters, but as
these were payable in a great many cities, and as I proposed visiting
Egypt, I did not wish to part with them. I therefore went to the
house of Rothschild, hoping to get an advance on my letter of credit,
although it was not addressed to that firm. But it being Saturday,
no business was done. I therefore inquired for another banker of
reputation, and was directed to M. Koch.

I accordingly called at his counting-house, stated my reason for
wanting the money, showed him my circular notes and letters of credit,
and asked whether, under these circumstances, he would cash my check
for twenty pounds. He immediately remarked that he had frequently
visited England, and that most probably we had several common friends,
as it soon appeared, for the first person he mentioned was Professor
Sedgwick.

M. Koch not only advanced me the money, but he was so kind as to invite
me to dinner on the following day, and to give me a seat in his box
at the opera on the first appearance of Madamoiselle Sontag on the
Frankfort stage.

I remember at least three other occasions in which I got money for
some of my English friends at towns where my letter of credit was not
addressed to any banker. In those cases I only asked them to take my
cheque, send it to London, and when they had received the amount, to
pay it over to me. I also mentioned that I was known to several persons
resident in Geneva and in Berlin where these occurrences happened.
In each case the banker immediately let me have the money my friends
wanted. {424}

〈DIFFICULTY OF GETTING CASH, HANDSOMELY REMOVED.〉

The only instance in which I was refused amused me very much. I spent
a few weeks at Modena, where I had purchased a microscope and several
other philosophical instruments. One morning I went to the wealthy firm
of Sanguinetti, and mentioning my object to one of the partners, at
the same time showing him my letter of credit, asked if, under these
circumstances, he would give me cash for a draft of twenty pounds on my
banker in London. He replied very courteously that it was the rule of
their house to give credit only upon letters addressed to them by their
_own_ correspondent in London. I remarked that it was quite necessary
in matters of business to adhere to fixed rules, and that when made
aware of their practice I should be the last person to ask them to
deviate from it.

Early the next morning a carriage drove up to the door of my lodgings
and an elderly gentleman was announced. This was M. Sanguinetti, the
senior partner of the firm. He told me he came to apologize for the
refusal of his junior partner on the preceding day, and to offer to
give me cash for my cheque to whatever amount I might require.

I replied that, a near relative of my own having formerly been a banker
in London, I was aware of the necessity of a rigid observance of rules
of business, and that his young partner had not only done his duty,
but, I added, that he had done it in the most courteous manner. M.
Sanguinetti was so obliging and so pressing, that I found it difficult
to accept the advance of so small a sum: however, it was all arranged,
and he left me.

I then sent for my landlord and inquired whether he had had any
communication with M. Sanguinetti. He replied that the old gentleman,
the head of the firm, had called the preceding evening, and asked
him who I was. “And what,” {425} said I to my landlord, “was your
answer?”—“I told him you were a Milord Anglais,” replied my host.—“I
am not a Milord Anglais,” I observed; “but why did you tell him
so?”—“Because,” said my landlord, “when the minister paid you a visit,
you sat down in his presence.”

The explanation of the affair was this. Soon after my arrival at
Modena, I called on the Marquis Rangoni, a distinguished mathematician,
who had written a profound comment on Laplace’s ‘Théorie des Fonctions
Génératrices.’ I had not brought any letter of introduction, but had
merely sent up my card. The Marquis Rangoni received me very cordially,
and we were soon in deep discussion respecting some of the most
abstract questions of analysis. He returned my visit on the following
day, when he resumed the discussion, and I showed him some papers
connected with the subject. I was aware of the title of the Marquis
Rangoni to respect, as arising from his own profound acquaintance with
analysis, but I was now, for the first time, informed that he was a man
of great importance in the little Dukedom of Modena, for he was the
Prime Minister of the Grand Duke—in fact, the Palmerston of Modena.
This at once explained the attention I received from the wealthy banker.


_The Speaker._

One Saturday morning an American gentleman who had just arrived from
Liverpool, where he had landed from the United States on the previous
day, called in Dorset Street. He was very anxious to see the Difference
Engine, and quite fitted by his previous studies for understanding
it well. I took him into the drawing-room in which the machine then
resided and gave him a short explanation of its structure. As I
expected a large party of my friends in the evening, {426} amongst
whom were a few men of science, I asked him to join the party.

〈A CONTRAST—ENGLAND—AMERICA.〉

It so happened on that day that the Speaker had a small dinner-party.
The Silver Lady was accidentally mentioned, and greatly excited the
curiosity of the lady of the house. As the whole of this small party,
comprising three or four of my most intimate friends, were coming to
my house in the evening, they proposed that the Speaker and his wife
should accompany them to my party, assuring them truly that I should be
much gratified by the visit.

The Silver Lady happened to be in brilliant attire, and after
mentioning the romance of my boyish passion, the unexpected success
of her acquisition, and the devoted cultivation I bestowed upon her
education, I proceeded to set in action her fascinating and most
graceful movements.

A gay but by no means unintellectual crowd surrounded the automaton.
In the adjacent room the Difference Engine stood nearly deserted:
two foreigners alone worshipped at that altar. One of them, but just
landed from the United States, was engaged in explaining to a learned
professor from Holland what he had himself in the morning gathered from
its constructor.

Leaning against the doorway, I was myself contemplating the strongly
contrasted scene, pleased that my friends were relaxing from their
graver pursuits, and admiring the really graceful movements produced
by mechanism; but still more highly gratified at observing the deep
and almost painful attention of my Dutch guest, who was questioning
his American instructor about the mechanical means I had devised for
accomplishing some arithmetical object. The deep thought with which
this explanation was attended to, {427} suddenly flashed into intense
delight when the simple means of its accomplishment were made apparent.

My acute and valued friend, the late Lord Langdale, who had been
observing the varying changes of my own countenance, as it glanced
from one room to the other, now asked me, “What new mischief are you
meditating?”—“Look,” said I, “in that further room—England. Look again
at this—two Foreigners.”


_Ancient Music._

Many years ago some friends of mine invited me to accompany them to the
concert of ancient music, and join their supper-party after it was over.

My love of music is not great, but for the pleasure of the society I
accepted the invitation. On our meeting at the supper-table, I was
overwhelmed with congratulations upon my exquisite appreciation of
the treat we had just had. I was assured that though my expression
of feeling was of the quietest order, yet that I was the earliest to
approve all the most beautiful passages.

I accepted modestly my easily-won laurels, and perhaps my taste for
music might have survived in the memory of my friends, when my taste
for mechanism had been forgotten. I will, however, confide to the
public the secret of my success. Soon after I had taken my seat at the
concert, I perceived Lady Essex at a short distance from me. Knowing
well her exquisitely sensitive taste, I readily perceived by the
expression of her countenance, as well as by the slight and almost
involuntary movement of the hand, or even of a finger, those passages
which gave her most delight. These quiet indications, unobserved by my
friends, formed the electric wire by which I directed the expressions
of my own {428} countenance and the very modest applause I thought it
prudent to develop.

After receiving the congratulations of my friends upon my great musical
taste, I informed them how easily that reputation had been acquired.
Such are the feeble bases on which many a public character rests.

       *       *       *       *       *

During my residence with my Oxford tutor, whilst I was working by
myself on mathematics, I occasionally arrived at conclusions which
appeared to me to be new, but which from time to time I afterwards
found were already well known. At first I was much discouraged by
these disappointments, and drew from such occurrences the inference
that it was hopeless for me to attempt to invent anything new. After
a time I saw the fallacy of my reasoning, and then inferred that when
my knowledge became much more extended I might reasonably hope to make
some small additions to my favourite science.

〈PHILOSOPHY OF INVENTION.〉

This idea considerably influenced my course during my residence at
Cambridge by directing my reading to the original papers of the great
discoverers in mathematical science. I then endeavoured to trace the
course of their minds in passing from the known to the unknown, and to
observe whether various artifices could not be connected together by
some general law. The writings of Euler were eminently instructive for
this purpose. At the period of my leaving Cambridge I began to see more
distinctly the object of my future pursuit.

It appeared to me that the highest exercise of human faculties
consisted in the endeavour to discover those laws of thought by
which man passes from the known to that which {429} was unknown. It
might with propriety be called the philosophy of invention. During
the early part of my residence in London, I commenced several essays
on Induction, Generalization, Analogy, with various illustrations
from different sources. The philosophy of signs always occupied my
attention, and to whatever subject I applied myself I was ever on the
watch to perceive and record the links by which the new was connected
with the known.

〈EARLY ESSAYS.〉

Most of the early essays I refer to were not sufficiently matured for
publication, and several have appeared without any direct reference
to the great object of my life. I may, however, point out one of my
earlier papers in the “Philosophical Transactions for 1817,” which,
whilst it made considerable additions to a new branch of science, is
itself a very striking instance of the use of analogy for the purpose
of invention. I refer to the “Essay on the Analogy between the Calculus
of Functions and other Branches of Analysis.”—_Phil. Trans._ 1817.

{430}




CHAPTER XXXIII.

THE AUTHOR’S CONTRIBUTIONS TO HUMAN KNOWLEDGE.


 Scientific Societies — Analytical Society — Astronomical Society —
 Grand Duke of Tuscany, Leopold II. — Scientific Meeting at Florence
 — Also at Berlin — At Edinburgh — At Cambridge — Origin of the
 Statistical Society — Statistical Congress at Brussels — Calculus
 of Functions — Division of Labour — Verification part of Cost —
 Principles of Taxation — Extension to Elections — The two Pumps —
 Monopoly — Miracles.

_Of the part taken by the Author in the formation of various Scientific
Societies._

The origin of the Analytical Society has been already explained in the
fourth chapter. In the year 1820 the Author of this volume, joining
with several eminent men attached to astronomical pursuits, instituted
the Royal Astronomical Society. At the present time only three of
the original founders survive. The meetings, and still more the
publications of that society, have contributed largely to extend the
taste for astronomy.

In 1827 I visited Italy, and during my residence at Florence had many
opportunities of observing the strong feeling of the reigning Grand
Duke Leopold II., not only for the fine arts, but for the progress of
science, and for its application to the advancement of the arts of life.

〈THE GRAND DUKE OF TUSCANY.〉

After a long tour in Italy, I found myself in the following year again
in Florence, and again I was received with a kindness and consideration
which I can never forget. The Grand {431} Duke was anxious to know my
opinion respecting the state of science in Italy. At one of the many
interviews with which I was honoured, he asked me whether I could point
out any way in which he could assist its progress.

The question was unexpected; but it immediately recalled to me a recent
circumstance, which I then mentioned, namely, that in three of the
great cities of Italy I had been consulted confidentially by three
distinguished men of science upon the same subject, on which each was
separately engaged without being aware of the fact that the other
two were employed on the same inquiry. The result, I remarked, would
probably be that Italy would thus make _one_ step in science, and that
the discovery might probably be accompanied by painful discussions
respecting priority; whilst with better means of intercommunication
amongst its men of science Italy might have made _three_ steps in
advance. The idea of a periodical meeting of men engaged in scientific
pursuits naturally arose out of these remarks. At parting, the Grand
Duke requested me to draw up a minute of the conversation. I therefore
drew up a note on the subject, in which I shadowed out an annual
meeting of learned men in the various cities of Italy.

On finally taking leave, previous to my visit to Germany, the Grand
Duke assured me that he had read the minute of our conversation with
much attention, that he saw the evils pointed out, and agreed with me
as to the remedy. He then observed that “the time for such a meeting
had not yet arrived; but,” added the Grand Duke, “when it does arrive,
you may depend upon me.”

Eleven years after, in 1839, I was honoured by an invitation from the
Grand Duke of Tuscany to meet the men of science of Italy, then about
to assemble at Florence. In this communication it was observed, that
“the time had _now_ arrived.” {432}

In the autumn of 1828 I reached Berlin, and unexpectedly found, from M.
Humboldt, that in the course of a few weeks the philosophers of Germany
were to hold a meeting in that capital.

I then learnt for the first time that, some years before, Dr. Oken
had proposed and organized an annual congress of German naturalists,
meeting in each succeeding year in some great town.

I remained to witness the enlarged meeting at Berlin, which was
very successful, and wrote an account of it to Sir D. Brewster,
who published the description of it in “The Edinburgh Journal of
Science.”[58] This was, I believe, the first communication to the
English public of the existence of the German Society.

〈BRITISH ASSOCIATION: ITS ORIGIN.〉

A few years after, Sir David Brewster, Sir John Robison, Secretary of
the Royal Society of Edinburgh, and the Rev. William Vernon Harcourt,
undertook the foundation of a similar periodical and itinerant society
in our own country.

It appeared to me that the original organization of the British
Association, as developed at York and at Oxford, was defective,—that
its basis was not sufficiently extended. In fact, that other sciences
besides the physical were wanting for the harmony and success of the
whole. There was no section to interest the landed proprietors or
those members of their families who sat in either house of parliament.
Nor was there much to attract the manufacturer or the retail dealer.
A purely accidental circumstance enabled me to remedy one of these
defects.[59] {433}

     [58] Vol. x., p. 225. 1829.

     [59] I afterwards succeeded in getting the British Association
     to adopt the plan of having an exhibition of specimens of the
     various manufactures and commercial products of the districts it
     successively visited. This commenced at Newcastle in 1838, and
     was carried to a much greater extent in the following year at
     Birmingham. I am not aware that this fact was ever referred to by
     those who got up the Exhibition of 1851.

〈THE STATISTICAL SOCIETY: ITS ORIGIN.〉

At the Third Meeting of the British Association at Cambridge in 1833, I
happened, one afternoon, to call on my old and valued friend the Rev.
Richard Jones, Professor of Political Economy at Haileybury, who was
then residing in apartments at Trinity College. He informed me that he
had just had a long conversation with our mutual friend M. Quételet,
who had been sent officially by the Belgian Government to attend the
meeting of the British Association. That M. Quételet had brought with
him a budget of statistical facts, and that as there was no place for
it in any section, he (Professor Jones) had asked M. Quételet to come
to him that evening, and had invited Sir Charles Lemon, Professor
Malthus, Mr. Drinkwater (afterwards Mr. Bethune),[60] and one or
two others interested in the subject, to meet him, at the same time
requesting me to join the party. I gladly accepted this invitation
and departed. I had not, however, reached the gate of Trinity College
before it occurred to me that there was now an opportunity of doing
good service to the British Association. I returned to the apartments
of my friend, explained to him my views, in which he fully coincided,
and I suggested the formation of a Statistical Section. We both agreed
that unless some _unusual_ course were taken, it would be impossible to
get such a Section organized until the meeting in the following year. I
therefore proposed that when we met in the evening we should consider
the question of constituting ourselves provisionally a Statistical
Section, and afterwards, at the general meeting in the Senate House,
that I should explain the circumstance which had arisen, and the {434}
great advantage to the British Association of rendering such a Section
a permanent branch of its institution. After further explanations its
utility was fully admitted; certain rather stringent rules were laid
down in order to confine its inquiries to collections of facts. The
sanction of the General Meeting was then given to the establishment of
the Statistical Section, and before the termination of the Congress, a
larger audience was collected in its meeting-room than in those of any
of its sister sciences.

     [60] I have reason to believe, from the Note Book of Mr.
     Drinkwater (Bethune), that this meeting was held on Wednesday,
     26th June, 1833.

The interest of our discussions, and the mass of materials which now
began to open upon our view, naturally indicated the necessity of
forming a more permanent society for their collection. The British
Association approved of the appointment of a permanent committee of
this section. I was requested to act as chairman, and Mr. Drinkwater as
secretary. On the 15th March, 1834, at a public meeting held in London,
the Marquis of Lansdowne in the Chair, it was resolved to establish the
Statistical Society of London.

The Committee of the British Association, in reporting this fact to
the Council, observe that “though the want of such a society has been
long felt and acknowledged, the successful establishment of it, after
every previous attempt had failed, has been due altogether to the
impulse given by the last meeting of the Association. The distinguished
foreigner (M. Quételet) who contributed so materially to the formation
of the Statistical Section, was attracted to England principally with
a view of attending that meeting; and the Committee hail this as a
signal instance of the beneficial results to be expected from that
personal intercourse among the enlightened men of all countries, which
it is a principal object of the British Association to encourage and
facilitate.”

M. Quételet, on his return to his own country, continued to {435}
direct by his counsel, and to advance, by his own indefatigable
industry, those statistical inquiries of which the Belgian Government
so well appreciated the advantage.

At length the conviction of the importance of the value of Statistical
Science becoming widely extended in other countries, M. Quételet saw
that a fit time had arrived for summoning a European Congress. The
results of such meetings are invaluable to all sciences, but more
peculiarly to statistics, in which names have to be defined, signs
to be invented, methods of observation to be compared and rendered
uniform; thus enhancing the value of all future observations by making
them more comparable as well as more expeditiously collected.

The proposal was adopted by the Belgian Government, and the first
International Statistical Congress was held at Brussels in September,
1853.

The result was most successful; all the cultivators of Statistical
Science are deeply indebted to M. Quételet for the unwearied pains he
took to insure its success. He was assisted in this arduous task by the
ministers of the crown, and supported by the high approbation of an
enlightened sovereign.


_Calculus of Functions._

This was my earliest step, and is still one to which I would willingly
recur if other demands on my time permitted. Many years ago I
recorded, in a small MS. volume, the facts, and also extracts of
letters from Herschel, Bromhead, and Maule, in which I believe I have
done justice to my friends if not to myself. It is very remarkable
that the Analytical Engine adapts itself with singular facility to
the development and numerical working out of this vast department of
analysis.

In the list of my printed papers, at the end of this volume, will be
found my various contributions to that subject. {436}


POLITICAL ECONOMY.

My contributions to _Political Economy_ are chiefly to be found in “The
Economy of Machinery and Manufactures,” which consists of illustrations
and developments of the principles regulating a very large section of
that important subject.


_Division of Labour._

It is singular that in the analysis of the _division of labour_, given
by Adam Smith in “The Wealth of Nations,” the most efficient cause of
its advantage is entirely omitted. The three causes assigned in that
work are—

1st. The increase of dexterity in every particular workman.

2nd. The saving of time lost in passing from one species of work to
another.

3rd. The invention of a great number of machines which facilitate and
abridge labour, and enable one man to do the work of many.

These are undoubtedly true causes, but the most important cause is
entirely omitted.

The most effective cause of the cheapness produced by the division of
labour is this—

By dividing the work to be executed into different processes, each
requiring different degrees of skill, or of force, the master
manufacturer can purchase exactly that precise quantity of both which
is necessary for each process. Whereas if the whole work were executed
by one workman, that person must possess sufficient skill to perform
the most difficult, and sufficient strength to execute the most
laborious, of those operations into which the art is divided.

Needle-making is perhaps the best illustration of the overpowering
effect of this cause. The operatives in this {437} manufacture consist
of children, women, and men, earning wages varying from three or four
shillings up to five pounds per week. Those who point the needles
gain about two pounds. The man who hardens and tempers the needles
earns from five to six pounds per week. It ought also to be observed
that one man is sufficient to temper the needles for a large factory;
consequently the time spent on each needle by the most expensive
operative is excessively small.

But if a manufacturer insist on employing one man to make the whole
needle, he must pay at the rate of five pounds a week for every portion
of the labour bestowed upon it.[61]

     [61] See “Economy of Manufactures.”


_Cost of any Article._

Besides the usual elements which contribute to constitute the price
of any thing, there exists another which varies greatly in different
articles. It is this—

_The cost and difficulty of verifying the fact that the article is
exactly what it professes to be._

This is in some cases very small; but in many instances it is scarcely
possible for the purchaser to verify the genuineness of certain
articles. In these cases the public pay a larger price than they
otherwise would do to those tradesmen whose character and integrity are
well established.


_Principles of Taxation._

In a pamphlet printed in 1848, I published my views of taxation,
especially with reference to an Income Tax.

The principle there supported was entertained and examined by the
French Minister of Finance, M. Passy. The pamphlet itself was
subsequently translated into Italian and published at Turin, under the
auspices of the Sardinian Finance Minister. {438}

〈THE PRINCIPLE OF REPRESENTATION.〉

The principle there maintained admits, I think, of an extension to the
election of representatives.

In that case, each person would have one vote on the ground of his
personality, and other votes in proportion to his income. Whenever any
further extension of our representative system becomes necessary, the
dangers arising from the extension of the personal suffrage may fairly
be counterbalanced by giving a plurality of votes to property. Such
a course would have a powerful tendency to good, by supporting the
national credit and by preventing the destructive waste of capital by
war, and it might even make us a highly conservative people.

As the subject of political economy will be considered rather dry by
most readers, I will endeavour to enliven it by an extract from that
pamphlet, which singularly illustrates the question of direct and
indirect taxation. I had mentioned the productive pump of my Italian
friend to the late Lord Lansdowne, who supplied me with the counterpart
in the unproductive pump erected by the late William Edgeworth, at
Edgeworth Town, in Ireland.

That proprietor, whose country residence was much frequented by
beggars, resolved to establish a test for discriminating between the
idle and the industrious, and also to obtain some small return for the
alms he was in the habit of bestowing. He accordingly added to the
pump by which the upper part of his house was supplied with water, a
piece of mechanism so contrived that, at the end of a certain number
of strokes of the pump-handle, a penny fell out from an aperture to
repay the labourer for his work. This was so arranged, that labourers
who continued at the work, obtained very nearly the usual daily wages
of labour in that part of the country. The idlest of the vagabonds
of course refused this new labour test: but the greater part of the
beggars, whose {439} constant tale was that ‘_they could not earn a
fair day’s wages for a fair days work_,’ after earning a few pence,
usually went away _cursing_ the hardness of their taskmaster.

〈STORY OF THE TWO PUMPS.〉

An Italian gentleman, with greater sagacity, devised a more productive
pump, and kept it in action at far less expense. The garden wall
of his villa adjoined the great high road leading from one of the
capitals of northern Italy[62], from which it was distant but a few
miles. Possessing within his garden a fine spring of water, he erected
on the outside of the wall a pump for public use, and chaining to it
a small iron ladle, he placed near it some rude seats for the weary
traveller, and by a slight roof of climbing plants protected the whole
from the mid-day sun. In this delightful shade the tired and thirsty
travellers on that well-beaten road ever and anon reposed and refreshed
themselves, and did not fail to put in requisition the service of the
pump so opportunely presented to them. From morning till night many
a dusty and wayworn pilgrim plied the handle, and went on his way,
_blessing_ the liberal proprietor for his kind consideration of the
passing stranger.

     [62] Turin.

But the owner of the villa was deeply acquainted with human nature. He
knew in that sultry climate that the liquid would be more valued from
its scarcity, and from the difficulty of acquiring it. He therefore,
to enhance the value of the gift, wisely arranged the pump, so that
its spout was of rather contracted dimensions, and the handle required
a moderate application of force to work it. Under these circumstances
the pump raised far more water than could pass through its spout; and,
to prevent its being wasted, the surplus was conveyed by an invisible
channel to a large reservoir judiciously placed for watering the
proprietor’s own house, stables, and garden,—into which about five
pints were poured for every spoonful passing out of the spout for the
{440} benefit of the weary traveller. Even this latter portion was
not entirely neglected, for the waste-pipe conveyed the part which
ran over from the ladle to some delicious strawberry beds at a lower
level. Perhaps, by a small addition to this ingenious arrangement, some
kind-hearted travellers might be enabled to indulge their mules and
asses with a taste of the same cool and refreshing fluid; thus paying
an additional tribute to the skill and sagacity of the benevolent
proprietor. My accomplished friend would doubtless make a most popular
Chancellor of the Exchequer, should his Sardinian Majesty require his
services in that department of administration.


_Monopoly._

In the course of my examination of this question I arrived at what I
conceive to be a demonstration of the following principle:—

_That even under circumstances of the most absolute monopoly, the
monopolist will, if he_ KNOWS _his own interest and_ PURSUES _it,
sell the article he produces at exactly the same price as the freest
competition would produce_.

I devoted a chapter to this subject in an edition which I prepared
several years ago for a new Italian translation of the “Economy of
Manufactures;” but I am not aware whether it has yet been published.


_Miracles._

The explanation which I gave of the nature of miracles in “The Ninth
Bridgewater Treatise,” published in May, 1837, has now stood the test
of more than a quarter of a century, during which it has been examined
by some of the deepest thinkers in many countries. Its adoption by
those writers who have referred to it has, as far as my information
goes, been unanimous.

{441}




CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE AUTHOR’S FURTHER CONTRIBUTIONS TO HUMAN KNOWLEDGE.


 Glaciers — Uniform Postage — Weight of the Bristol Bags — Parcel
 Post — Plan for transmitting Letters along Aërial Wires — Cost
 of Verification is part of Price — Sir Rowland Hill — Submarine
 Navigation — Difference Engine — Analytical Engine — Cause of Magnetic
 and Electric Rotations — Mechanical Notation — Occulting Lights —
 Semi-occultation may determine Distances — Distinction of Lighthouses
 numerically — Application from the United States — Proposed Voyage —
 Loss of the Ship and Mr. Reid — Congress of Naval Officers at Brussels
 in 1853 — My Portable Occulting Light exhibited — Night Signals —
 Sun Signals — Solar Occulting Lights — Afterwards used at Sebastopol
 — Numerical Signals applicable to all Dictionaries — Zenith Light
 Signals — Telegraph for Ships on Shore — Greenwich Time Signals —
 Theory of Isothermal Surfaces to account for the Geological Facts of
 the successive Uprising and Depression of various parts of the Earth’s
 Surface — Games of Skill — Tit-tat-to — Exhibitions — Problem of the
 Three Magnetic Bodies.


_Of Glaciers._

Much has been written upon the subject of glaciers. The view which I
took of the question on my first acquaintance with them still seems to
me to afford a sufficient explanation of the phenomena. It is probable
that I may have been anticipated in it by Saussure and others; but,
having no time to inquire into its history, I shall give a very brief
statement of those views.

The greater part of the material which ultimately constitutes a glacier
arises from the rain falling and the snow deposited in the higher
portions of mountain ranges, which {442} naturally first fill up the
ravines and valleys, and rests on the tops of the mountains, covering
them to various depths.

The chief facts to be explained are—first, the causes of the descent
of these glaciers into the plains; second, the causes of the
transformation of the opaque consolidated snow at the sources of the
glacier into pure transparent ice at its termination.

The glaciers usually lying in valleys having a steep descent,
gravity must obviously have a powerful influence; but its action is
considerably increased by another cause.

The heat of the earth and that derived from the friction of the glacier
and its broken fragments against the rock on which it rests, as well as
from the friction of its own fragments, slowly melts the ice, and thus
diminishing the amount of its support, the ice above cracks and falls
down upon the earth, again to be melted and again to be broken.

But as the ice is upon an inclined plane, the pressure from above,
on the upper side of the fragment, will be greater than that on the
lower; consequently, at every fall the fallen mass will descend by a
very small quantity further into the valley. Another consequence of the
melting of the lower part of the centre of the glacier will be that the
centre will advance faster than the sides, and its termination will
form a curve convex towards the valley.

The above was, I believe, the common explanation of the formation of
glaciers. The following part explains my own views:—


_Of the Causes of the Transformation of Condensed Snow into Transparent
Ice._

It is a well-known fact that water rapidly frozen retains all the air
it held in solution, and is opaque. {443}

It is also known that water freezing very slowly is transparent.

Whenever, by the melting of the lower portion of any part of a glacier,
a piece of it cracks and falls to a lower level, the friction of the
broken sides will produce heat, and melt a small portion of water.
This water, trickling down very slowly, will form a thin layer on the
broken surface, and a portion will be retained in the narrowest part
of the crack. But, since the temperature of a glacier is very near the
freezing point, that water will freeze very slowly. It will, therefore,
become transparent ice, and will, as it were, solder together the two
adjacent surfaces by a thin layer of transparent ice.

But the transparent ice is much stronger and more difficult to break
than opaque ice; consequently, the next time the soldered fragments are
again broken, they will not break in the strongest part, which is the
transparent ice: but the next fracture will occur in the opaque ice, as
it was at first.

Thus, by the continued breaking and falling downward of the fragments
of the glacier, as it proceeds down the valley, a series of vertical,
rudely-parallel veins of transparent ice will be formed. As these
masses descend the valley, fresh vertical layers of transparent ice
will be interposed between those already existing until the whole takes
that beautiful transparent cerulean tint which we so frequently see at
the lower termination of a glacier. Another effect of this vertical
fracture at the surfaces of least resistance will be alternate vertical
layers of opaque and transparent ice shading into each other. This
would, in some of its stages, give a kind of ribboned appearance to the
ice. Probably traces of it would still be exhibited even in the most
transparent ice. Speaking roughly, this ribboned structure ought to
be closer together the nearer the piece examined is to the end of the
glacier. It {444} ought also to be more apparent towards the centre
of the glacier than towards the sides. The effect of this progress
downward is to produce a very powerful friction between the masses of
ice and the earth over which they are pushed, and, consequently, a
continual accession to that stream of water which is found issuing from
all glaciers.

The result of this continual breaking up is to cause all the water
melted by the friction of the blocks of ice which is not retained in
the interstices to fall towards the lowest part of the descending
valley, and thus increase the stream, and so take away more and more of
the support of the central part of the glacier. Hence the advance of
the surface of the glacier will be much quicker towards its middle than
near the sides.

〈CRACKS IN GLACIERS PERPENDICULAR.〉

The consequence of these actions is, that cracks in the ice will occur
generally in planes perpendicular to its surface. The rain which falls
upon the glacier, the water produced from its surface by the sun’s rays
and by the effect of the temperature of the atmosphere, as well as
the water produced by the friction of its descending fragments, will
penetrate through these cracks, and be retained by capillary action
on the surfaces, and still more where the distance of the adjacent
surfaces is very small. The rest of this unfrozen water will reach the
rocky bottom of the glacier, and give up some of its heat to the bed
over which it passes, to be again employed in melting away the lowest
support of the glacier ice. Although the temperature of the glacier
should differ but by a very small quantity from that of the freezing
point of water, yet these films will only freeze the more slowly, and
therefore become more solid and transparent ice. Their very thinness
will enable all the air to be more readily extricated by freezing.

The question of the _regelation_ of pounded ice, if by that {445} term
is meant anything more than welding ice by heat, or of joining its
parts by a process analogous to that which is called _burning together_
two separate portions of a bronze statue, has always appeared to me
unsatisfactory.

〈BURNING TOGETHER BRONZE.〉

The process of “burning together” is as follows:—Two portions of a
large statue, which have been cast separately, are placed in a trough
of sand, with their corresponding ends near to each other. A channel
is made in the sand, leading through the junction of the parts to be
united.

A stream of melted bronze is now allowed to run out from the furnace
through the channel between the contiguous ends which it is proposed
to unite. The first effect of this is to heat the ends of the two
fragments. After the stream of melted metal has continued some time, the
ends of those fragments themselves begin to melt. When a small quantity
of each end is completely melted, the further flow of the melted metal
is stopped, and as soon as the pool of melted metal connects, the two
ends of the pieces to be united begins to consolidate: the whole is
covered up with sand and allowed to cool gradually. When cold, the
unnecessary metal is cut away, and the fragments are as perfectly
united as if they had been originally cast in one piece.

The sudden consolidation, by physical force, of pounded ice or snow
appears to me to arise from the first effect of the pressure producing
heat, which melts a small portion into water, and brings the particles
of ice or snow nearer to each other. The portion of water thus produced
then, having its heat abstracted by the ice, connects the particles of
the latter more firmly together by freezing.

If two flat surfaces of clear ice had a heated plate of metal put
between them, two very thin layers of water would be formed between
the ice and the heated plate. If the hot {446} plate were suddenly
withdrawn, and the two plates of ice pressed together, they would then
be frozen together. This would be equivalent to welding. In all these
cases the temperature of the ice must be a very little lower than the
freezing-point. The more nearly it approached that point the slower the
process of freezing would be, and therefore the more transparent the
ice thus formed.

〈ICE FROZEN IN THE EXHIBITION, 1862.〉

In the Exhibition of 1862 there were two different processes by which
ice was produced in abundance, even in the heat of the Machinery Annex,
in which they were placed.

In both the water was quickly converted into ice, and in both cases the
ice was opaque.

In one of them the ice was produced in the shape of long hollow
cylinders. These were quite opaque, and were piled up in stacks. The
temperature of the place caused the ice to melt slowly; consequently,
the interstices where the cylinders rested upon each other, received
and retained a small portion of the water, which, trickling down, was
detained by capillary attraction. Here it was very slowly frozen, and
formed at the junction of the cylinders a thin film of transparent ice.
This gradually increased as the upper cylinders of the ice melted away,
and, after several hours’ exposure, I have seen clear transparent ice
a quarter of an inch thick, where, at the commencement, there had not
been even a trace of translucency.

On inquiring of the operator why the original cylinders were opaque,
he told me, because they were frozen quickly. I then pointed out to
him the small portions of transparent ice, which I have described, and
asked him the cause. He immediately said, because they had been frozen
slowly.

It appeared to be an axiom, derived from his own experience, that water
quickly frozen is always opaque, and water {447} slowly frozen always
transparent. I pointed out this practical illustration to many of the
friends I accompanied in their examination of the machinery of the
Annex.

It would follow from this explanation, that glaciers on lofty mountains
and in high latitudes may, by their own action, keep the surface of
the earth on which they rest at a higher temperature than it would
otherwise attain.


_Book and Parcel Post._

When my friend, the late General Colby, was preparing the materials
and instruments for the intended Irish survey, he generally visited
me about once a week to discuss and talk over with me his various
plans. We had both of us turned our attention to the Post-office, and
had both considered and advocated the question of a uniform rate of
postage. The ground of that opinion was, that the actual _transport_ of
a letter formed but a small item in the expense of transmitting it to
its destination; whilst the heaviest part of the cost arose from the
_collection_ and _distribution_, and was, therefore, almost independent
of the length of its journey. I got some returns of the weight of
the Bristol mail-bag for each night during one week, with a view to
ascertain the possibility of a more rapid transmission. General Colby
arrived at the conclusion that, supposing every letter paid sixpence,
and that the same number of letters were posted, then the revenue
would remain the same. I believe, when an official comparison was
subsequently made, it was found that the equivalent sum was fivepence
halfpenny. I then devised means for transmitting letters enclosed in
small cylinders, along wires suspended from posts, and from towers, or
from church steeples. I made a little model of such an apparatus, and
thus transmitted notes from my front drawing-room, through the house,
{448} into my workshop, which was in a room above my stables. The date
of these experiments I do not exactly recollect, but it was certainly
earlier than 1827.

〈COST OF VERIFICATION.〉

I had also, at a still earlier period, arrived at the remarkable
economical principle, _that one element in the price of every article
is the cost of its verification_. It arose thus:—

In 1815 I became possessed of a house in London, and commenced my
residence in Devonshire Street, Portland Place, in which I resided
until 1827. A kind relative of mine sent up a constant supply of
game. But although the game cost nothing, the expense charged for its
carriage was so great that it really was more expensive than butchers’
meat. I endeavoured to get redress for the constant overcharges, but
as the game was transferred from one coach to another I found it
practically impossible to discover where the overcharge arose, and thus
to remedy the evil. These efforts, however, led me to the fact that
_verification_, which in this instance constituted a considerable part
of the _price of the article, must form a portion of its price in every
case_.

Acting upon this, I suggested that if the Government were to become,
through the means of the Post-office, parcel carriers, they would
derive a greater profit from it than any private trader, because the
whole price of verification would be saved by the public. I therefore
recommended the enlargement of the duties of the Post-office by
employing it for the conveyance of books and parcels.

I mention these facts with no wish to disparage the _subsequent_
exertions of Sir Rowland Hill. His devotion to the subject, his
unwearied industry, and his long and at last successful efforts to
overcome the notorious official friction of that department, required
all the enduring energy he so constantly bestowed upon the subject.
The benefit {449} conferred upon the country by the improvements he
introduced is as yet scarcely sufficiently estimated.

These principles were published afterwards in the “Economy of
Manufactures.”—See First Edition, 8th June, 1832; Second Edition, 22nd
November, 1832. See chap. on the “Influence of Verification on Price,”
p. 134, and “Conveyance of Letters,” p. 273.


_Submarine Navigation._

Of this it is not necessary to do more than mention the title and refer
for the detail to the chapter on Experience by Water: and also to the
article Diving Bell in the “Encyclopædia Metropolitana.”

I have only to add my opinion that in open inverted vessels it may
probably be found, under certain circumstances, of important use.


_Difference Engine._

Enough has already been said about that unfortunate discovery in
the previous part of this volume. The first and great cause of its
discontinuance was the inordinately extravagant demands of the
person whom I had employed to construct it for the Government. Even
this might, perhaps, by great exertions and sacrifices, have been
surmounted. There is, however, a limit beyond which human endurance
cannot go. If I survive some few years longer, the Analytical Engine
will exist, and its works will afterwards be spread over the world.
If it is the will of that Being, who gave me the endowments which led
to that discovery, that I should not survive to complete my work, I
bow to that decision with intense gratitude for those gifts: conscious
that through life I have never hesitated to make the {450} severest
sacrifices of fortune, and even of feelings, in order to accomplish my
imagined mission.

The great principles on which the Analytical Engine rests have been
examined, admitted, recorded, and demonstrated. The mechanism itself
has now been reduced to unexpected simplicity. Half a century may
probably elapse before any one without those aids which I leave behind
me, will attempt so unpromising a task. If, unwarned by my example,
any man shall undertake and shall succeed in really constructing an
engine embodying in itself the whole of the executive department
of mathematical analysis upon different principles or by simpler
mechanical means, I have no fear of leaving my reputation in his
charge, for he alone will be fully able to appreciate the nature of my
efforts and the value of their results.


_Explanation of the Cause of Magnetic and Electric Rotations._

In 1824 Arago published his experiments on the magnetism manifested
by various substances during rotation. I was much struck with the
announcement, and immediately set up some apparatus in my own workshop
in order to witness the facts thus announced.

My friend Herschel, who assisted at some of the earliest experiments,
joined with me in repeating and varying those of Arago. The results
were given in a joint paper on that subject, published in the
“Transactions of the Royal Society” in 1825.

I had previously made some magnetic experiments on a large magnet
which would, under peculiar management, sustain about 32½ lbs. It was
necessary to commence with a weight of about 28 lbs., and then to add
at successive intervals additional weights, but each less and less than
the former. {451}

〈ON ELECTRIC ROTATIONS.〉

This led me to an explanation of the cause of those rotations, which
I still venture to think is the true cause, although it is not so
recognized by English philosophers.

The history is a curious one, and whether the cause which I assigned
is right or wrong, the train of thought by which I was led to it is
valuable as an illustration of the mode in which the human mind works
in its progress towards new discoveries.

The first experiment, showing that the weight suspended might be
increased at successive intervals of time, was stated in most treatises
on magnetism. But the visible fact impressed strongly on my mind the
conclusion that the production and discharge of magnetism is not
instantaneous, but requires time for its complete action. It appeared,
therefore, to me that this principle was sufficient for the explanation
of the rotations observed by Arago.

In the following year it occurred to me that electricity possessed the
same property, namely, that of requiring time for its communication.
I then instituted a new series of experiments, and succeeded, as I
had anticipated, in producing electric rotations. But a new fact now
presented itself: in certain cases the electric needle moved back in
the contrary direction to that indicated by the influences to which
it was subjected. Whenever this occurred the retrograde motion was
always very slow. After eliminating successively by experiment every
cause which I could imagine, the fact which remained was, that in
certain cases there occurred a motion in the direction opposite to
that which was expected. But whenever such a motion occurred it was
always very slow. Upon further reflection, I conjectured that it might
arise from the screen, interposed between the electric and the needle
itself, becoming electrified possibly in the opposite direction. New
experiments confirmed this view and proved {452} that the original
cause was sufficient for the production of all the observed effects.

These experiments and their explanation were printed in the “Phil.
Trans.” 1826. But they met with so little acceptance in England that I
had ceased to contend for them against more popular doctrines, and was
too deeply occupied with other inquiries to enter on their defence.
Several years after, during a visit to Berlin, taking a morning walk
with Mitscherlich, I asked what explanation he adopted of the magnetic
rotations of Arago. He instantly replied, “There can be no doubt that
yours is the true one.”

It will be a curious circumstance in the history of science, if an
erroneous explanation of new and singular experiments in one department
should have led to the prevision of another similar set of facts in a
different department, and even to the explanation of new facts at first
apparently contradicting it.


_Mechanical Notation._

This also has been described in a former chapter. I look upon it as one
of the most important additions I have made to human knowledge. It has
placed the construction of machinery in the rank of a demonstrative
science. The day will arrive when no school of mechanical drawing will
be thought complete without teaching it.


_Occulting Lights._

The great object of all my inquiries has ever been to endeavour to
ascertain those laws of thought by which man makes discoveries. It was
by following out one of the principles which I had arrived at that I
was led to the system of occulting numerical lights for distinguishing
lighthouses {453} and for night signals at sea, which I published
about twelve years ago. The principle I allude to is this:—

〈PRINCIPLE OF INVENTION.〉

Whenever we meet with any defect in the means we are contriving for the
accomplishing a given object, that defect should be noted and reserved
for future consideration, and inquiry should be made—

_Whether that which is a defect as regards the object in view may not
become a source of advantage in some totally different subject._

I had for a long series of years been watching the progress of
electric, magnetic, and other lights of that order, with the view of
using them for domestic purposes; but their want of uniformity seemed
to render them hopeless for that object. Returning from a brilliant
exhibition of voltaic light, I thought of applying the above rule. The
accidental interruptions might, by breaking the circuit, be made to
recur at any required intervals. This remark suggested their adaptation
to a system of signals. But it was immediately followed by another,
namely: that the interruptions were equally applicable to all lights,
and might be effected by simple mechanism.

〈UNEXPECTED DIFFICULTY.〉

I then, by means of a small piece of clock-work and an argand lamp,
made a _numerical_ system of occultation, by which any number might be
transmitted to all those within sight of the source of light. Having
placed this in a window of my house, I walked down the street to the
distance of about 250 yards. On turning round I perceived the number
32 clearly indicated by its occultations. There was, however, a small
defect in the apparatus. After each occultation there was a kind of
semi-occultation. This arose from the arm which carried the shade
rebounding from the stop on which it fell. Aware that this defect could
be easily remedied, I {454} continued my onward course for about 250
yards more, with my back towards the light. On turning round I was much
surprised to observe that the signal 32 was repeated distinctly without
the slightest trace of any semi-occultation or blink.

I was very much astonished at this change; and on returning towards
my house had the light constantly in view. After advancing a short
distance I thought I perceived a very faint trace of the blink. At
thirty or forty paces nearer it was clearly visible, and at the
half-way point it was again perfectly distinct. I knew that the remedy
was easy, but I was puzzled as to the cause.

After a little reflection I concluded that it arose from the
circumstance that the small hole through which the light passed was
just large enough to be visible at five hundred yards, yet that when
the same hole was partially covered by the rebound there did not remain
sufficient light to be seen at the full distance of five hundred yards.

Thus prepared, I again applied the principle I had commenced with and
proceeded to examine whether this defect might not be converted into an
advantage.

〈OCCULTING SIGNALS.〉

I soon perceived that a lighthouse, whose number was continually
repeated with a blink, obscuring just half its light, would be seen
_without any blink_ at all distances beyond half its range; but that
at all distances within its half range that fact would be indicated by
a blink. Thus with two blinks, properly adjusted, the distance of a
vessel from a first-class light would be distinguished at from twenty
to thirty miles by occultations indicating its number without any
blink; between ten and twenty miles by an occultation with one blink,
and within ten miles by an occultation with two blinks.

But another advantage was also suggested by this defect. {455} If the
opaque cylinder which intercepts the light consists of two cylinders, A
and B, connected together by rods: thus—

 If the compound cylinder descend to _a_, and then rise again, there
 will be a single occultation.

 If the compound cylinder descend to _b_, and then rise again, there
 will be a double occultation.

 If the compound cylinder descend to _c_, and then rise again, there
 will be a triple occultation.

Such occultations are very distinct, and are specially applicable to
lighthouses.

[Illustration]

In the year 1851, during the Great Exhibition, the light I have
described was exhibited from an upper window of my house in Dorset
Street during many weeks. It had not passed unnoticed by foreigners,
who frequently reminded me that they had passed my door when I was
asleep by writing upon their card the number exhibited by the occulting
light and dropping it into my letter-box.

About five or six weeks after its first appearance I received a letter
from a friend of mine in the United States, expressing great interest
about it, and inquiring whether its construction was a secret. My
answer was, that I made no {456} secret of it, and would prepare and
send him a short description of it.

I then prepared a description, of which I had a very few copies
printed. I sent twelve of these to the proper authorities of the
great maritime countries. Most of them were accompanied by a private
note of my own to some person of influence with whom I happened to be
acquainted.

One of these was addressed to the present Emperor of the French, then a
member of their Representative Chamber. It was dated the 30th November,
1852. Three days after I read in the newspapers the account of the
_coup_ of December 2, and smiled at the inopportune time at which my
letter had accidentally been forwarded. However, three days after
I received from M. Mocquard the prettiest note, saying that he was
commanded by the Prince President to thank me for the communication,
and to assure me that the Prince was as much attached as ever to
science, and should always continue to promote its cultivation.

〈EXPERIMENTS IN AMERICA.〉

The letter which was sent to the United States was placed in the hands
of the Coast Survey. The plan was highly approved, and Congress made
a grant of 5,000 dollars, in order to try it experimentally. After a
long series of experiments, in which its merits were severely tested, a
report was made to Congress strongly recommending its adoption. I then
received a very pressing invitation to visit the United States, for
the purpose of assisting to put it in action. It was conveyed to me by
an amiable and highly cultivated person, the late Mr. Reed, Professor
of English Literature at Philadelphia, who, on his arrival in London,
proposed that I should accompany him on his return in October, the best
season for the voyage, and in the finest vessel of their mercantile
navy. I had long had a great wish to visit the American continent, but
I did {457} not think it worth crossing the Atlantic, unless I could
have spent a twelvemonth in America. Finding this impossible under the
then circumstances, about a month before the time arrived I resigned
with great reluctance the pleasure of accompanying my friend to his own
country.

〈THE AUTHOR’S ESCAPE.〉

It was most fortunate that I was thus prevented from embarking on board
the Arctic, a steamer of the largest class.

Steaming at the rate of thirteen knots an hour over the banks of
Newfoundland during a dense fog, the Arctic was run into by a steamer
of about half its size, moving at the rate of seven knots. The
concussion was in this instance fatal to the larger vessel.

This sad catastrophe was thus described by the brother of my lost
friend:—

 “On the 20th of September, 1854, Mr. Reed, with his sister, embarked
 at Liverpool for New York, in the United States steamship Arctic.
 Seven days afterwards, at noon, on the 27th, when almost in sight of
 his native land, a fatal collision occurred, and before sundown every
 human being left upon the ship had sunk under the waves of the ocean.
 The only survivor who personally acquainted with my brother, saw
 him about two o’clock, P.M., after the collision, and not very long
 before the ship sank, sitting with his sister in the small passage
 aft of the dining-saloon. They were tranquil and silent, though their
 faces wore the look of painful anxiety. They probably afterwards left
 this position, and repaired to the promenade deck. For a selfish
 struggle for life, with a helpless companion dependent upon him, with
 a physical frame unsuited for such a strife, and above all, with a
 sentiment of religious resignation which taught him in that hour of
 agony, even with the memory of his wife and children thronging in his
 mind, to bow his head in {458} submission to the will of God,—for such
 a struggle he was wholly unsuited; and his is the praise, that he
 perished with the women and children.”

〈OCCULTING LIGHT AT BRUSSELS.〉

In 1853 I spent some weeks at Brussels. During my residence in that
city a Congress of naval officers from all the maritime nations
assembled to discuss and agree upon certain rules and observations to
be arranged for the common benefit of all. One evening I had the great
pleasure of receiving the whole party at my house for the purpose of
witnessing my occulting lights.

The portable occulting light which I had brought with me was placed in
the verandah on the first floor, and we then went along the Boulevards
to see its effect at different distances and with various numerical
signals. On our return several papers relating to the subject were
lying upon the table. The Russian representative, M. ———, took up one
of the original printed descriptions and was much interested in it. On
taking leave he asked, with some hesitation, whether I would lend it
to him for a few hours. I told him at once that if I possessed another
copy I would willingly give it to him; but that not being the case I
could only offer to lend it. M. ——— therefore took it home with him,
and when I sat down to breakfast the next morning I found it upon my
table. In the course of the day I met my Russian friend in the Park. I
expressed my hope that he had been interested by the little tract he
had so speedily returned. He replied that it had interested him so much
that he had sat up all night, had copied the whole of it, and that his
transcript and a despatch upon the subject was now on its way by the
post to his own Government.

Several years after I was informed that _occulting solar lights_ {459}
were used by the Russians during the siege of Sebastopol.


_Night Signals._

The system of occulting light applies with remarkable facility to night
signals, either on shore or at sea. If it is used numerically, it
applies to all the great dictionaries of the various maritime nations.
I may here remark, that there exist means by which all such signals
may, if necessary, be communicated in cipher.


_Sun Signals._

The distance at which such signals can be rendered visible exceeds
that of any other class of signals by means of light. During the Irish
Trigonometrical Survey, a mountain in Scotland was observed, with an
angular instrument from a station in Ireland, at the distance of 108
miles. This was accomplished by stationing a party on the summit of
the mountain in Scotland with a looking-glass of about a foot square,
directing the sun’s image to the opposite station. No occultations were
used; but if the mirror had been larger, and occultation employed,
messages might have been sent, and the time of residence upon the
mountain considerably diminished. When I was occupied with occulting
signals, I made this widely known. I afterwards communicated the plan,
during a visit to Paris, to many of my friends in that capital, and, by
request, to the Minister of Marine.

I have observed in the “Comptes Rendus” that the system has to a
certain extent been since used in the south of Algeria, where, during
eight months of the year, the sun is generally unobscured by clouds
as long as it is above the horizon. I have not, however, noticed in
those communications to the Institute any reference to my own previous
publication. {460}


_Zenith-light Signals._

Another form of signal, although not capable of use at very great
distances, may, however, be employed with considerable advantage,
under certain circumstances. Universality and economy are its great
advantages. It consists of a looking-glass, making an angle of 45°
with the horizon, placed just behind an opening in a vertical board.
This being stuck into the earth, the light of the sky in the zenith,
which is usually the brightest, will be projected horizontally through
the opening, in whatever direction the person to be communicated with
may be placed. The person who makes the signals must stand on one side
in front of the instrument; and, by passing his hat slowly before the
aperture any number of times, may thus express each unit’s figure of
his signal.

He must then, leaving the light visible, pause whilst he deliberately
counts to himself ten.

He must then with his hat make a number of occultations equal to the
tens figure he wishes to express.

This must be continued for each figure in the number of the signal,
always pausing between each during the time of counting ten.

When the end of the signal is terminated, he must count sixty in the
same manner; and if the signal he gave has not been acknowledged, he
should repeat it until it has been observed.

The same simple telegraph may be used in a dark night, by substituting
a lantern for the looking-glass. The whole apparatus is simple and
cheap, and can be easily carried even by a small boy.

I was led to this contrivance many years ago by reading an account of
a vessel stranded within thirty yards of the shore. {461} Its crew
consisted of thirteen people, ten of whom got into the boat, leaving
the master, who thought himself safer in the ship, with two others of
the crew.

The boat put off from the ship, keeping as much out of the breakers
as it could, and looking out for a favourable place for landing. The
people on shore followed the boat for several miles, urging them not to
attempt landing. But not a single word was audible by the boat’s crew,
who, after rowing several miles, resolved to take advantage of the
first favourable lull. They did so—the boat was knocked to pieces, and
the whole crew were drowned. If the people on the shore could at that
moment have communicated with the boat’s crew, they could have informed
them that, by continuing their course for half a mile further, they
might turn into a cove, and land almost dry.

I was much impressed by the want of easy communication between stranded
vessels and those on shore who might rescue them.

〈SHIPWRECK SIGNALS.〉

I can even now scarcely believe it credible that the very simple means
I am about to mention has not been adopted years ago. A list of about
a hundred questions, relating to directions and inquiries required to
be communicated between the crew of a stranded ship and those on shore
who wish to aid it, would, I am told, be amply sufficient for such
purposes. Now, if such a list of inquiries were prepared and printed
by competent authority, any system of signals by which a number of
two places of figures can be expressed might be used. This list of
inquiries and answers ought to be printed on cards, and nailed up on
several parts of every vessel. It would be still better, by conference
with other maritime nations, to adopt the same system of signs, and to
have them printed in each language. A looking-glass, a board with a
hole in it, and a {462} lantern would be all the apparatus required.
The lantern might be used for night, and the looking-glass for day
signals.

These simple and inexpensive signals might be occasionally found useful
for various social purposes.

〈SHORT DISTANCE SIGNALS.〉

Two neighbours in the country whose houses, though reciprocally
visible, are separated by an interval of several miles, might
occasionally telegraph to each other.

If the looking-glass were of large size, its light and its occultation
might be seen perhaps from six to ten miles, and thus become by
daylight a cheap guiding light through channels and into harbours.

It may also become a question whether it might not in some cases save
the expense of buoying certain channels.

For railway signals during daylight it might in some cases be of great
advantage, by saving the erection of very lofty poles carrying dark
frames through which the light of the sky is admitted.

Amongst my early experiments, I made an occulting hand-lantern, with a
shade for occulting by the pressure of the thumb, and with two other
shades of red and of green glass. This might be made available for
military purposes, or for the police.


_Greenwich Time Signals._

It has been thought very desirable that a signal to indicate Greenwich
time should be placed on the Start Point, the last spot which ships
going down the Channel on distant voyages usually sight.

The advantage of such an arrangement arises from this—that chronometers
having had their rates ascertained on shore, may have them somewhat
altered by the motions to {463} which they are submitted at sea. If,
therefore, after a run of above two hundred miles, they can be informed
of the exact Greenwich time, the sea rate of their chronometers will be
obtained.

Of course no other difficulty than that of expense occurs in
transmitting Greenwich time by electricity to any points on our coast.
The real difficulty is to convey it to the passing vessels. The firing
of a cannon at certain fixed hours has been proposed, but this plan is
encumbered by requiring the knowledge of the distance of the vessel
from the gun, and also from the variation of the velocity of the
transmission of sound under various circumstances.

During the night the flash arising from ignited gunpowder might be
employed. But this, in case of rain or other atmospheric circumstances,
might be impeded. The best plan for night-signals would be to have
an occulting light, which might be that of the lighthouse itself, or
another specially reserved for the purpose.

During the day, and when the sun is shining, the time might be
transmitted by the occultations of reflected solar light, which would
be seen at any distance the curvature of the earth admitted.

The application of my Zenith Light might perhaps fulfil all the
required conditions during daylight.

I have found that, even in the atmosphere of London, an opening only
five inches square can be distinctly seen, and its occultations counted
by the naked eye at the distance of a quarter of a mile. If the side
of the opening were double the former, then the light transmitted to
the eye would be four times as great, and the occultations might be
observed at the distance of one mile.

The looking-glass employed must have its side nearly in {464} the
proportion of three to two, so that one of five feet by seven and a
half ought to be seen at the distance of about eight or nine miles.


_Geological Theory of Isothermal Surfaces._

During one portion of my residence at Naples my attention was
concentrated upon what in my opinion is the most remarkable building
upon the face of the earth, the Temple of Serapis, at Puzzuoli.[63]

     [63] In this inquiry I profited by the assistance of Mr.
     Head, now the Right Hon. Sir Edmund Head, Bart., K.C.B., late
     Governor-General of Canada. An abstract of my own observations
     was printed in the “Abstracts of Proceedings” of the Geological
     Society, vol. ii. p. 72. My friend’s historical views were printed
     in the “Transactions” of the Antiquarian Society.

〈TEMPLE OF SERAPIS.〉

It was obviously built at or above the level of the Mediterranean in
order to profit by a hot spring which supplied its numerous baths.
There is unmistakable evidence that it has subsided below the present
level of the sea, at least twenty-five feet; that it must have remained
there during many years; that it then rose gradually up, probably to
its former level, and that during the last twenty years it has been
again slowly subsiding.

The results of this survey led me in the following year to explain the
various elevations and depressions of portions of the earth’s surface,
at different periods of time, by a theory which I have called the
theory of the earth’s isothermal surfaces.

I do not think the importance of that theory has been well understood
by geologists, who are not always sufficiently acquainted with physical
science. The late Sir Henry De la Beche perceived at an early period
the great light those sciences might throw upon his own favourite
pursuit, and {465} was himself always anxious to bring them to bear
upon geology.

I am still more confirmed in my opinion of the importance of the
“Theory of Isothermal Surfaces in Geology” from the fact that a few
years afterwards my friend Sir John Herschel arrived independently at
precisely the same theory. I have stated this at length in the notes to
the “Ninth Bridgewater Treatise.”


_Games of Skill._

A considerable time after the translation of Menabrea’s memoir had been
published, and after I had made many drawings of the Analytical Engine
and all its parts, I began to meditate upon the intellectual means
by which I had reached to such advanced and even to such unexpected
results. I reviewed in my mind the various principles which I had
touched upon in my published and unpublished papers, and dwelt with
satisfaction upon the power which I possessed over mechanism through
the aid of the Mechanical Notation. I felt, however, that it would be
more satisfactory to the minds of others, and even in some measure
to my own, that I should try the power of such principles as I had
laid down, by assuming some question of an entirely new kind, and
endeavouring to solve it by the aid of those principles which had so
successfully guided me in other cases.

〈GAMES OF SKILL CAN BE PLAYED BY AN AUTOMATON.〉

After much consideration I selected for my test the contrivance of a
machine that should be able to play a game of purely intellectual skill
successfully; such as tit-tat-to, drafts, chess, &c.

I endeavoured to ascertain the opinions of persons in every class of
life and of all ages, whether they thought it required human reason
to play games of skill. The almost constant {466} answer was in the
affirmative. Some supported this view of the case by observing, that
if it were otherwise, then an automaton could play such games. A few
of those who had considerable acquaintance with mathematical science
allowed the possibility of machinery being capable of such work; but
they most stoutly denied the possibility of contriving such machinery
on account of the myriads of combinations which even the simplest games
included.

On the first part of my inquiry I soon arrived at a demonstration that
every game of skill is susceptible of being played by an automaton.

Further consideration showed that if _any position_ of the men upon the
board were assumed (whether that position were possible or impossible),
then if the automaton could make the first move rightly, he must be
able to win the game, always supposing that, under the given position
of the men, that conclusion were possible.

Whatever move the automaton made, another move would be made by his
adversary. Now this altered state of the board is _one_ amongst the
_many positions_ of the men in which, by the previous paragraph, the
automaton was supposed capable of acting.

Hence the question is reduced to that of making the best move under any
possible combinations of positions of the men.

Now the several questions the automaton has to consider are of this
nature:—

 1. Is the position of the men, as placed before him on the board, a
 possible position? that is, one which is consistent with the rules of
 the game?

 2. If so, has Automaton himself already lost the game?

 3. If not, then has Automaton won the game? {467}

 4. If not, can he win it at the next move? If so, make that move.

 5. If not, could his adversary, if he had the move, win the game.

 6. If so, Automaton must prevent him if possible.

 7. If his adversary cannot win the game at his next move, Automaton
 must examine whether he can make such a move that, if he were allowed
 to have two moves in succession, he could at the second move have
 _two_ different ways of winning the game;

and each of these cases failing, Automaton must look forward to three
or more successive moves.

Now I have already stated that in the Analytical Engine I had devised
mechanical means equivalent to memory, also that I had provided other
means equivalent to foresight, and that the Engine itself could act on
this foresight.

〈NUMBER OF THE COMBINATIONS.〉

In consequence of this the whole question of making an automaton play
any game depended upon the possibility of the machine being able to
represent all the myriads of combinations relating to it. Allowing one
hundred moves on each side for the longest game at chess, I found that
the combinations involved in the Analytical Engine enormously surpassed
any required, even by the game of chess.

〈GAME OF TIT-TAT-TO.〉

As soon as I had arrived at this conclusion I commenced an examination
of a game called “tit-tat-to,” usually played by little children. It
is the simplest game with which I am acquainted. Each player has five
counters, one set marked with a +, the other set with an 0. The board
consists of a square divided into nine smaller squares, and the object
of each player is to get three of his own men in a straight {468}
line. One man is put on the board by each player alternately. In
practice no board is used, but the children draw upon a bit of paper,
or on their slate, a figure like any of the following.

The successive moves of the two players may be represented as follow:—

 MOVES.
     1.     2.     3.     4.     5.     6.     7.

    │ │    │ │    │ │+   │ │+  +│ │+  +│0│+  +│0│+
   ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─
    │ │    │0│    │0│    │0│    │0│    │0│   +│0│
   ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─  ─┼─┼─
    │ │   +│ │   +│ │   +│ │0  +│ │0  +│ │0  +│ │0

In this case + wins at the seventh move.

The next step I made was to ascertain what number of combinations were
required for all the possible variety of moves and situations. I found
this to be comparatively insignificant.

I therefore easily sketched out mechanism by which such an automaton
might be guided. Hitherto I had considered only the philosophical
view of the subject, but a new idea now entered my head which seemed
to offer some chance of enabling me to acquire the funds necessary to
complete the Analytical Engine.

It occurred to me that if an automaton were made to play this game,
it might be surrounded with such attractive circumstances that a very
popular and profitable exhibition might be produced. I imagined that
the machine might consist of the figures of two children playing
against each other, accompanied by a lamb and a cock. That the child
who won the game might clap his hands whilst the cock was crowing,
after which, that the child who was beaten might cry and wring his
hands whilst the lamb began bleating.

I then proceeded to sketch various mechanical means by which every
action could be produced. These, when compared with those I had
employed for the Analytical Engine, {469} were remarkably simple. A
difficulty, however, arose of a novel kind. It will have been observed,
in the explanation I gave of the Analytical Engine, that cases arose
in which it became necessary, on the occurrence of certain conditions,
that the machine itself should select one out of two or more distinct
modes of calculation. The particular one to be adopted could only be
known when those calculations on which the selection depended had been
already made.

〈DIFFICULTY ARISING FROM CHOICE.〉

The new difficulty consisted in this, that when the automaton had to
move, it might occur that there were two different moves, each equally
conducive to his winning the game. In this case no reason existed
within the machine to direct his choice: unless, also, some provision
were made, the machine would attempt two contradictory motions.

The first remedy I devised for this defect was to make the machine keep
a record of the number of games it had won from the commencement of its
existence. Whenever two moves, which we may call A and B, were equally
conducive to winning the game, the automaton was made to consult the
record of the number of the games he had won. If that number happened
to be even, he was directed to take the course A; if it were odd, he
was to take the course B.

If there were three moves equally possible, the automaton was directed
to divide the number of games he had won by three. In this case the
numbers 0, 1, or 2 might be the remainder, and the machine was directed
to take the course A, B, or C accordingly.

It is obvious that any number of conditions might be thus provided for.
An inquiring spectator, who observed the games played by the automaton,
might watch a long time before he discovered the principle upon which
it acted. It is also worthy of remark how admirably this illustrates
{470} the best definitions of chance by the philosopher and the poet:—

 “Chance is but the expression of man’s ignorance.”—LAPLACE.

 “All chance, design ill understood.”—POPE.

〈EXHIBITION OF AUTOMATON.〉

Having fully satisfied myself of the power of making such an automaton,
the next step was to ascertain whether there was any probability, if
it were exhibited to the public, of its producing, in a moderate time,
such a sum of money as would enable me to construct the Analytical
Engine. A friend, to whom I had at an early period communicated the
idea, entertained great hopes of its pecuniary success. When it became
known that an automaton could beat not merely children but even papa
and mamma at a child’s game, it seemed not unreasonable to expect
that every child who heard of it would ask mamma to see it. On the
other hand, every mamma, and some few papas, who heard of it would
doubtless take their children to so singular and interesting a sight. I
resolved, on my return to London, to make inquiries as to the relative
productiveness of the various exhibitions of recent years, and also
to obtain some rough estimate of the probable time it would take to
construct the automaton, as well as some approximation to the expense.

It occurred to me that if half a dozen were made, they might be
exhibited in three different places at the same time. Each exhibitor
might then have an automaton in reserve in case of accidental
injury. On my return to town I made the inquiries I alluded to, and
found that the English machine for making Latin verses, the German
talking-machine, as well as several others, were entire failures in
a pecuniary point of view. I also found that the most profitable
exhibition which had occurred for many years was that of the little
dwarf, General Tom Thumb. {471}

On considering the whole question, I arrived at the conclusion, that to
conduct the affair to a successful issue it would occupy so much of my
own time to contrive and execute the machinery, and then to superintend
the working out of the plan, that even if successful in point of
pecuniary profit, it would be too late to avail myself of the money
thus acquired to complete the Analytical Engine.


_Problem of the Three Magnetic Bodies._

The problem of the three bodies, which has cost such unwearied labour
to so many of the highest intellects of this and the past age, is
simple compared with another which is opening upon us. We now possess a
very extensive series of well-recorded observations of the positions of
the magnetic needle, in various parts of our globe, during about thirty
years.

〈CAUSES OF MAGNETIC CHANGES.〉

Certain periods of changes of about ten or eleven years are said to be
indicated as connected with changes in the amount of solar spots; but
the inductive evidence scarcely rests upon three periods, and it seems
more probable that these effects arise from some common cause.

 (1.) It has been long known that the earth has at least two if not
 more magnetic poles.

 (2.) It is probable, therefore, that the sun and moon also have
 several magnetic poles.

 (3.) In 1826 I proved that when a magnet is brought into proximity
 to a piece of matter capable of becoming magnetic, the magnetism
 communicated by it requires _time_ for its full development in the
 body magnetized. Also that when the influence of the magnet is
 removed, the magnetized body requires _time_ to regain its former
 state. {472}

This being the case, it is required, having assumed certain positions
for the poles of these various magnetic bodies, to calculate their
reciprocal influences in changing the positions of those poles on the
other bodies. The development of the equations representing these
forces will indicate cycles which really belong to the nature of the
subject. The comparisons of a long series of observations with recorded
facts will ultimately enable us to determine both the number and
position of those poles upon each body.

〈ELECTRIC CHANGES.〉

Electricity possesses an analogous property with respect to time being
required for its full action. If the bodies of our system influence
each other electrically, other developments will be required and other
cycles discovered.

When the equations resulting from the actions of these causes are
formed, and means of developing them arranged, the whole of the rest of
the work comes under the domain of machinery.

{473}




CHAPTER XXXV.

RESULTS OF SCIENCE.


 Board of Longitude — Professorship of Mathematics at the East
 India College — Professorship of Mathematics at Edinburgh —
 Secretaryship of the Royal Society — Master of the Mint — Ditto —
 Ditto — Registrar-General of Births, Deaths, and Marriages — Ditto —
 Commissioner of Railways — Ditto — Ditto Abolished.

At the commencement of life I had hoped that, whilst I indulged in the
pursuits of science, I might derive from it some advantages for my
family, or at least, that it might enable me to replace a small portion
of the large expenditure, without which one of my most important
discoveries could not be practically worked out.

I shall now mention briefly several of those appointments for which
I had the vanity to suppose myself qualified, and the simplicity to
believe that fitness for the office was of the slightest use without
interest to get the appointment.

1. In the early part of 1816 the Professorship of Mathematics at
the East India College at Haileybury became vacant. The salary, I
believe, was 500 _l_. a-year. I became a candidate, and had strong
recommendations from Ivory and Playfair. I was informed that it was
usual for the candidates to call on the Directors. I did so. One of
them was an honest man, for he was kind enough to tell me the truth.
He said, “If you have interest, you will get it; if not, you will not
succeed.” {474}

2. In 1819 the Professorship of Mathematics at Edinburgh became vacant
by the death of Playfair, and the succession of Professor Leslie to his
chair. I immediately became a candidate, and received testimony of my
fitness from Lacroix, Biot, and Laplace.

These communications, though gratifying to myself, were useless for
the object. Not being a Scot, I was rejected at Edinburgh. That visit,
however, led to a very agreeable incident. I spent a delightful week at
Kinneil with Dugald Stewart. The second volume of his “Philosophy of
the Human Mind” had fortunately fallen into my hands at an early period
during my residence at Cambridge, and I had derived much instruction
from that valuable work.

〈BOARD OF LONGITUDE.〉

3. About this time, in a conversation with Sir Joseph Banks, I
mentioned my wish to have a seat at the Board of Longitude—an office
to which a salary of 100 _l._ a-year was attached. Although not then
appointed, hopes were held out by Sir Joseph that at some future
occasion I might be more successful. In 1820 another vacancy occurred
in the Board of Longitude. I called on Sir Joseph Banks to ask his
influence with the Admiralty; this he declined, alleging as a reason
for withholding it,—the part I had taken in the institution of the
Astronomical Society.

I was one of its founders, had been one of its first Honorary
Secretaries, and had taken an active part in that Committee, by which
the “Nautical Almanac” was remodelled.

4. In 1824 an opportunity unexpectedly presented itself. I was invited
to take the entire organization and management of an office for the
assurance of lives, then about to be established.

It is sufficient to state that amongst our officers were the late
Marquis of Lansdowne, the late Lord Abercrombie, the {475} present
Master of the Rolls, and the present Judge of the Admiralty Court; and
that our direction included some of the first merchants in the City,
two or three Directors of the Bank of England, and about an equal
number of India Directors.

〈LIFE ASSURANCE OFFICE.〉

The proposition made to me was that I should have the entire management
of the concern as Director and Actuary, with a salary of 1,500 _l._
a-year, and apartments in the establishment, with liberty to practise
as an Actuary.

On consulting my friend the late Francis Baily, F.R.S., who had himself
practised as an Actuary, he strongly advised me to accept the office.
He assured me that the profit arising from private practice could
scarcely be less than 1,000 _l._ a year, and would probably be much
more.

Under these circumstances, I accepted the proposition. On examining
the materials which existed for a Table of the value of lives, I found
in one of the addresses of Mr. Morgan, the Actuary of the Equitable,
materials with which to construct, by the aid of various calculations,
a very tolerable Table of the actual mortality in that Society. Upon
this basis I calculated the Tables of our new Institution. After three
months’ labour, when the whole of the arrangements had been completed,
and the day for our opening had been fixed, circumstances occurred
which induced us to give up the plan. After the experience I had now
had of the amount of time occupied by such an office, I was unwilling
to renew the engagement with other parties. I hoped by great exertions
to complete the Difference Engine after the lapse of a few years, and
that I should not be allowed to become a serious loser by that course.

The Institution was therefore given up, and we each contributed about
100 _l._ to discharge the expenses incurred.

Within the subsequent twelvemonth, an application to take {476} the
management of another Life Assurance Society was made to me, which I
declined. That office is still in existence.

The information and experience I had thus gained led me to think that
the public were not sufficiently informed respecting the nature of
assurances on lives, and that a small popular work on the subject might
be useful. I prepared such a work as intervals of leisure admitted,
and early in 1826 published it under the title of “A Comparative View
of the various Institutions for the Assurance of Lives.” This little
volume was soon translated into German, and became the groundwork upon
which the Great Life Assurance Society of Gotha was founded. Every year
since that event I have received a copy of the report of the state of
the Institution—a gratifying attention which I am happy to have this
opportunity of acknowledging.

The wish expressed by my translator, in his Preface,[64] has also been
fulfilled by the establishment of many other excellent Life Assurance
Offices, founded on similar principles.

     [64] “May this book soon give rise to many flourishing life
     assurance companies in our beloved fatherland, by which
     proportionate wealth and happiness may be promoted amongst us, and
     at the same time prepare for the decline of lotteries.”—_German
     translation of Babbage on Life Assurance._

〈GERMAN ASSURANCE COMPANIES.〉

In Germany alone there were, in 1860, twenty-four Life Assurance
Companies, in which about 260,000 persons were assured to the amount of
upwards of forty millions sterling. The oldest and most successful of
these institutions have adopted my Table of the Equitable experience,
and I am informed that it agrees very well with the results of their
own experience up to about the fifty-seventh year. After this the
deaths are rather more frequent than those of the Equitable.

Another still more gratifying result arose. My father, whose
acquaintance with mercantile affairs was very {477} extensive, was so
pleased with the little book that, during the two last years of his
life, he read it through three times.

〈MASTERSHIP OF THE MINT.〉

5. In 1846 the Mastership of the Mint became vacant. In former days it
was held by Newton. I had pointed it out in “The Decline of Science” as
one of those offices to which men of science might reasonably aspire.
A complete acquaintance with the most advanced state of mechanical
science, which the demands of my own machinery had compelled me to
improve, added to a knowledge of the internal economy of manufactories,
appeared to me to constitute fair claims to that office.

In the event of my succeeding, I had proposed to let the whole of my
salary accumulate, so that at the end of ten or twelve years I might
retire from the office, and be enabled, with the 20,000 _l._ thus
earned, to construct the Analytical Engine.

I wrote to Lord Melbourne on the subject, but I did not mention that
circumstance even to my most intimate friends. It came, however, to the
knowledge of one of them, who took a very warm interest in my success;
and I believe that at first I had a very fair chance. The appointment
remained for a short time in abeyance; but it was found necessary to
detach Sheil from O’Connell, and the appointment was therefore given to
Sheil.

Some years after, when Sheil was appointed our Minister at the court of
Tuscany, he asked me to give him a letter of introduction to the Grand
Duke Leopold II. Of course I treated the application as a joke; but
Sheil assured me that he was quite serious, and that he knew it would
be of use to him. I therefore gave him a letter of introduction to a
sovereign from whom both before and subsequently I have been honoured
by many gratifying attentions. {478}

6. In 1849, on the promotion of Sheil, the Mastership of the Mint
again became vacant. I thought my own claims sufficiently known to the
public; but I had no political interest. My friend Sir John Herschel
was more fortunate, and he received the appointment.

7. After a few years, the office again became vacant by the resignation
of Sir John Herschel. The Government had now for the third time an
opportunity of partially repairing its former neglect. I had, however,
no political party to support me, and the present Master of the Mint,
Mr. Graham, then received the appointment.


_Registrar-General of Births, Deaths, &c._

8. In 1835 a new office was created, that of Registrar-General of
Births, Deaths, and Marriages. Mr. Francis Baily and others of my
friends suggested to me that, being known to the public as qualified
for this situation by my previous publications, I had a fair claim to
the appointment. Having made inquiries on this subject, I found that it
would be useless to make any application, as the place was intended for
the brother-in-law of a Secretary of State.

9. On the death of Mr. Lister, a few years after, the same office again
became vacant, when other friends then made a similar suggestion.

On making preliminary inquiries, I found, as before, that all
applications would be useless, as the appointment was intended for a
military officer, Major Graham, the brother of another Secretary of
State.


_Commissioners of Railways._

10. Some years ago, the alarm created by accidents occurring upon
railways, induced the Government to consider {479} about the
appointment of a Commission to examine into their causes, and to lay
down rules for the guidance of the Companies in the prevention of those
dangers.

In 1846 an Act of Parliament was passed appointing Commissioners for
the supervision of railways. Having myself thought much upon the
subject, and having had personally some experience on railways, I had
the vanity to think that the mechanical knowledge of the author of “The
Economy of Manufactures” would justify his appointment as one of those
Commissioners.

Applying, under such circumstances, for a Commissionership of the
Railway Board, I expected that I should find few competitors with
higher claims. But I had no interest—a military engineer was appointed,
who already held a civil appointment, and who died in less than two
years after.

11. On the occurrence of this vacancy another military officer was
appointed. I was again passed over, under circumstances which at the
time I thought must have caused deep regret in the mind of the Minister
who made the appointment.

After an existence of a few years, public opinion was so strongly
expressed against the Railway Commission that it was dissolved.

I am satisfied that in each of these cases, the appointment was
entirely due to family or political influence.

I have, in the course of my experience, frequently heard of
appointments made in the most flattering and unexpected manner; of
titles offered, in fact, in such a way, that it was impossible to
decline them. Having myself seen a good deal behind the scenes of
the drama of life, I have repeatedly found that these unsolicited
honours have been obtained by the most persevering applications, and
by the most servile {480} flattery. Indeed, to the great scandal of
public life, success has in some instances been attained by a man
condescending for a time to oppose his own party, and, as some observer
has wittily remarked, “of attempting to break into the shop for the
purpose of serving behind the counter.”

〈REFLECTIONS ON PATRONAGE.〉

It cannot be doubted that patronage entrusted to the disposition of
a Minister often proves an onerous and ungrateful trust, demanding
powers of discrimination and forbearance not always found in public
men; whilst a careful observation of the manner in which patronage is
usually dispensed does not lead to the conclusion that its exercise is
always free from the influence of corrupt motives. Even in the cases
in which such impure motives _seem_ absent, it too frequently happens
that other influences beside a just and honest discrimination appear to
have taken a part in regulating the distribution of public favour. It
would be invidious to speculate on the motives or discuss the merits
of the appointments to which I have had occasion to refer: with their
propriety or otherwise I have individually no concern: of the positive
motives which induced them I have no knowledge, at least not sufficient
to justify me in condemning them on that score. But I cannot help
thinking that such appointments have not always been made without some
degree of pain or misgiving, and perhaps a conscientious scruple on the
part of the Minister; indeed I have sometimes indulged a suspicion that
a little firmness to resist external pressure would occasionally secure
more fairness to candidates for public employment, and tend to retain
the services of more efficient agents of the public weal.

〈THE WEIGHT OF NEPOTISM.〉

Although mankind may differ among one another individually _ad
infinitum_, they possess certain moral elements which are common to
the race. Such belong to the animal, {481} and are never obliterated,
though they may occasionally be concealed by the ermine of office or
the robe of state. Self-interest is the great lever of society; and
though the patriot profess to sacrifice it for the public good, or the
cynic affect to despise its influence as opposed to his philosophy,
both these may claim our respect, but neither should be permitted to
deceive us. A Minister who professes to cast off the attributes of
humanity is either a victim of delusion who has succeeded in deceiving
himself, or a knave who is bent upon deceiving others. He may spurn the
temptation of a bribe, because his wants do not lie in that direction;
and, notwithstanding his generous pretensions, he will never discern
merit unless accompanied by popular suffrage or political influence: in
_his_ balance one grain of _nepotism_ will weigh down all the _honesty_
he has at his disposal.

{482}




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AGREEABLE RECOLLECTIONS.


In the course of this volume I have mentioned, under other heads, many
agreeable circumstances, and many others remain unwritten. I shall now
confine myself to two.

On one occasion when I was engaged in my workshop in arranging some
machinery for experiments on a difficult part of the Analytical Engine,
an intimate friend called, and I went into the library to see him. An
unopened letter lying on the table, he asked whether I usually treated
my letters in that way. I looked at the letter, which appeared to be a
printed one. When my friend had left me, I opened it, and found that it
professed to be from the Institute of France, announcing my nomination
as a corresponding member of that distinguished body. On looking at
the conclusion for the well-known signature of my friend Arago, I
found another name which I could not read. I therefore concluded that
some wag had played me a trick. I however doubted whether the joke was
intended to hit me or the Academy of Sciences.

Having left the paper on my table, I returned to my experiments. After
dinner I took up the neglected document, and then for the first time
perceived that it professed to be from the Academy of Moral Sciences.
On re-examining the signature, I found it to be that of its eminent
{483} secretary, M. Mignet, and that it was the official announcement
of my election as a Corresponding Member of that Academy.

〈ACADEMY OF MORAL SCIENCES.〉

Now the first impression on my own mind was one of sincere regret.
I felt for a moment that the Academy might have thus honoured me
not solely for my labours in their own, but in other departments of
science. This painful feeling was, however, only momentary. It then
occurred to me that I had written the “Economy of Manufactures,” which
related to Political Economy, one section; and the “Ninth Bridgewater
Treatise,” which related to Philosophy, another section of the Academy
of Moral Sciences. I now felt a real pleasure, which amply compensated
me for the transitory regret; and I am sure no member of the many
academies who have honoured me by enrolling my name on their list will
reproach me for stating the fact,—that no other nomination ever gave me
greater satisfaction than the one to which I have now adverted.

Some years ago my eldest son, Mr. B. Herschel Babbage, was employed by
the Government of South Australia to explore and survey part of the
north-western portion of that colony. After an absence of about six
months, a considerable portion of which time he spent in a desert, he
reached a small station at the head of Spencer’s Gulf, intending to
wait there until the arrival of a steamer from Adelaide, which was
expected in about a week to carry back the wool of the distant and
scattered colonists.

It so happened that, a few days before, a Swedish merchant-vessel,
commanded by Capt. Orling, a part owner of the ship, had also arrived
in search of a freight of wool. Captain Orling on going ashore heard of
the arrival at the settlement of a stranger from the interior, and on
inquiry found that he bore my name. {484}

〈GRATEFUL SWEDES.〉

He immediately went in search of my son, and having found him, said, “I
am not personally acquainted with your father, but I am well acquainted
with his name: he has shown such kindness to a countryman of mine[65]
that every Swede would be proud of an opportunity of acknowledging it.
The steamer for which you are waiting cannot arrive until a week hence.
There are no accommodations in this station, not even a public-house; I
entreat you to come on board my ship and be my guest until the steamer
arrives and is ready to take you to Adelaide.”

     [65] It had been my good fortune to have an opportunity of
     rendering justice to the merits of Mr. Scheütz, the inventor of
     the Swedish Difference Engine.

My son, who during the six previous months had slept under no canopy
but that of heaven, accepted this delightful invitation, and enjoyed,
during a week, the society of a very agreeable and highly-informed
gentleman.

I have received many marks of attention of various kinds from natives
of Sweden—paragraphs translated from Swedish newspapers which were
peculiarly interesting to me, engravings, and printed volumes. I have
been honoured with these attentions by persons in various classes of
society up to the highest, and I am confident that the enlightened and
accomplished Prince to whom I allude will not think me ungrateful when
I avow that the most gratifying of all these attentions to a father,
whose name in his own country has been useless to himself and to his
children, was to hear from England’s antipodes of a grateful Swede
welcoming and giving hospitality on the part of his countrymen to my
son for the sake of the name he bore.

{485}


_Conclusion._

I will now conclude, as I began, by invoking the attention of my reader
to a subject which, if he is young, may be of importance to him in
after-life. He may reasonably ask what peculiarities of mind enabled
me to accomplish what even the most instructed in their own sciences
deemed impossible.

I have always carefully watched the exercise of my own faculties, and
I have also endeavoured to collect from the light reflected by other
minds some explanation of the question.

I think one of the most important guiding principles has been
this:—that every moment of my waking hours has always been occupied by
_some train of inquiry_. In far the largest number of instances the
subject might be simple or even trivial, but still work of inquiry, of
some kind or other, was always going on.

The difficulty consisted in adapting the work to the state of the body.
The necessary training was difficult. Whenever at night I found myself
sleepless, and wished to sleep, I took a subject for examination that
required little mental effort, and which also had little influence on
worldly affairs by its success or failure.

On the other hand, when I wanted to concentrate my whole mind upon an
important subject, I studied during the day all the minor accessories,
and after two o’clock in the morning I found that repose which the
nuisances of the London streets only allow from that hour until six in
the morning.

At first I had many a sleepless night before I could thus train myself.

I believe my early perception of the immense power of signs in aiding
the reasoning faculty contributed much to {486} whatever success I
may have had. Probably a still more important element was the intimate
conviction I possessed that the highest object a reasonable being could
pursue was to endeavour to discover those laws of mind by which man’s
intellect passes from the known to the discovery of the unknown.

This feeling was ever present to my own mind, and I endeavoured to
trace its principle in the minds of all around me, as well as in the
works of my predecessors.

{487}




APPENDIX.


MIRACLES.

_Note (A), page 394._

It has always occurred to my mind that many difficulties touching
Miracles might be reconciled, if men would only take the trouble to
agree upon the nature of the phenomenon which they call “Miracle.” That
writers do not always mean the same thing when treating of miracles is
perfectly clear; because what may appear a miracle to the unlearned is
to the better instructed only an effect produced by some unknown law
hitherto unobserved. So that the idea of miracle is in some respect
dependent upon the opinion of man. Much of this confusion has arisen
from the definition of Miracle given in Hume’s celebrated Essay,
namely, that it is the “violation of a law of nature.”

Now a miracle is not necessarily a violation of any law of nature, and
it involves no physical absurdity.

As Brown well observes, “the laws of nature surely are not violated
when a new antecedent is followed by a new consequent; they are
violated only when the antecedent, being exactly the same, a different
consequent is the result;” so that a miracle has nothing in its nature
inconsistent with our belief of the uniformity of nature. All that we
see in a miracle is an effect which is new to our observation, and
whose cause is concealed.

The cause may be beyond the sphere of our observation, and would be
thus beyond the familiar sphere of nature; but this does not make the
event a violation of any law of nature. The limits of man’s observation
lie within very narrow boundaries, {488} and it would be arrogance
to suppose that the reach of man’s power is to form the limits of the
natural world. The universe offers daily proof of the existence of
power of which we know nothing, but whose mighty agency nevertheless
manifestly appears in the most familiar works of creation. And shall we
deny the existence of this mighty energy simply because it manifests
itself in delegated and feeble subordination to God’s omnipotence?

There is nothing in the nature of a miracle that should render it
incredible: its credibility depends upon the nature of the evidence
by which it is supported. An event of extreme probability will not
necessarily command our belief unless upon a sufficiency of proof;
and so an event which we may regard as highly improbable may command
our belief if it is sustained by sufficient evidence. So that the
credibility or incredibility of an event does not rest upon the nature
of the event itself, but depends upon the nature and sufficiency of the
proof which sustains it.

Mill, in speaking of Hume’s celebrated principle, “that nothing is
credible which is contradictory to experience, or at variance with
the laws of nature,” calls it a very plain and harmless proposition,
being, in effect, nothing more than that whatever is contradictory to a
complete induction is incredible.

Admit the existence of a Deity, and the possibility of a miracle is the
natural consequence. No doubt our examination of the evidence which
sustains an unusual phenomenon should be most carefully conducted; but
we must not measure the credibility or incredibility of an event by the
narrow sphere of our own experience, nor forget that there is a Divine
energy which overrides what we familiarly call the laws of nature.

If a miracle is not a suspension or a violation of the laws of nature,
it may fairly be asked, What is it?

If we define a miracle as an effect of which the cause is unknown to
us, then we make our ignorance the source of miracles! and the universe
itself would be a standing miracle. {489} A miracle might be perhaps
defined more exactly as an effect which is not the consequence or
effect of any known laws of nature. Dr. Clarke defines a miracle as
a singular event produced contrary to the ordinary laws of nature by
the intervention of an intelligent Being superior to man. The Abbé
Houteville defines a miracle as the result of the general order of the
mechanism of the universe. “It is,” he says, “a result of the harmony
of the general laws which God has decreed for the working out of the
system of the universe.” Spinosa says, “As men call that science
Divine which surpasses the reach of the human mind, so they detect
the hand of God in every phenomenon of which the cause is unknown
to them.” And certain it is that men attach more importance to an
apparent suspension or violation of the ordinary laws of nature than
to the wonderful harmony and uniformity of the laws of the universe;
as though it implied a greater degree of power to suspend or interfere
with such laws than to establish them and preserve their uniformity in
the economy of the universe. Whilst Nature follows out her ordinary
course, man, familiarized with the movement of the celestial orbs, sees
myriads of globes revolve in moving harmony about their spheres with
a kind of vacant indifference, nor imagines for a moment that he sees
aught to excite his wonder or stimulate his intelligence into inquiry;
in fact, he does not see God in His works. But if this harmony and
uniformity are interrupted for a moment, man detects the power of God
in the interruption, albeit he could not perceive it in the uniformity
of natural cause and effect. This singular obtuseness of the human
mind I leave to the discussion of theologians and philosophers; for
my own part, I confess my utter inability to comprehend it. Whatever
truly exists must emanate from the will of God, whether the event falls
within what we understand by the uniformity of nature, or whether it is
otherwise. A miracle must fall within one of these categories; and in
either case it is the effect of the will of God. Such an interruption
does not imply any notion of caprice or imperfection in the Deity;
but, on the contrary, it {490} is one of the attributes of His power,
and quite consistent with our notions of the liberty of His will,
unrestrained by any laws which it may be His pleasure to promulgate for
the government of the universe.

“Opera mutat, consilia non mutat,” says St. Augustin. Miracles may be,
for anything we know to the contrary, phenomena of a higher order of
God’s laws, superior to, and, under certain conditions, controlling the
inferior order known to us as the ordinary laws of nature.

The great difficulty in the consideration of miracles is, that being
in the nature of things incapable of verification, the evidence which
would be sufficient to establish the truth of an ordinary event within
the sphere of natural phenomena would not be sufficient to command our
assent in the case of a miracle. And this does not arise from a miracle
being opposed to nature, but on account of the infirmity of our nature;
for we are always liable to be deceived, not only by others, but even
by our own senses.

The extraordinary character of an event, although it does not
necessarily render the truth of its existence incredible, should,
nevertheless, put us upon our guard, and render us particularly
cautious in examining the evidence upon which its truth is asserted.
We should even examine with care and caution the evidence of phenomena
of the most ordinary character before we yield our complete assent to
the apparent truth of their manifestation; and _à fortiori_ in the
examination of the evidence which sustains extraordinary phenomena
we should require much stronger evidence, and such as rebuts the
possibility of being deceived by other persons, or even by our senses.

But we must be careful to discriminate between our own incapacity to
test truth and the necessary improbability of an event. It is plain
that from our ignorance of the remote spheres of God’s action we
cannot judge of His works removed from our experience; but a fact is
not necessarily doubtful because it cannot be reached by our ordinary
senses. To recapitulate, we may lay down the following propositions:—
{491}

1. That there is no real physical distinction between miracles and any
other operations of the Divine energy: that we regard them differently
is because we are familiar with one order of events and not the other.

2. There is nothing incredible in a miracle, and the credibility of a
miraculous event is to be measured only by the evidence which sustains
it. And although the extraordinary character of a phenomenon may render
the event itself improbable, it does not, therefore, necessarily render
it either incredible or untrue.


RELIGION.

_Note (B), page 403._

St. Athanasius is not the author of the Creed which bears his name. It
did not, in fact, exist within a century after his death. It originally
appeared in a Latin text, and consequently in the Western provinces.
Gennadius, Patriarch of Constantinople, was less tolerant of its
eccentricities, or more sensible to its sublimity even than myself, for
he was so amazed at the extraordinary character of its composition that
he frankly pronounced it to be the work of a drunken man. See ‘Petav.
Dogmat. Theologica,’ tom. II. lvii. c. 8, p. 687; and Gibbon’s ‘Decline
and Fall,’ vol. iv. p. 335. If we may trust La Bletterie for the
character of Athanasius, nothing is more improbable than that he could
be the author of the Creed still preserving his name. “He was,” says
La Bletterie, “the greatest man of his age, and perhaps the greatest
that the Church has ever possessed. He was endued with a well-balanced,
a lively, and penetrating mind; a generous and disinterested heart; a
courage and heroism always equal; a lively faith, and a charity without
bounds; a profound humility; a Christianity bold, but simple and noble
as the Gospel. His eloquence was natural, distinguished by a rare
precision of speech.”

The foundation of all religion is the belief in a God, and that He
exists in certain relation with His creatures. Such belief {492}
necessarily leads to the consciousness of some obligation towards the
Deity; and this consciousness suggests the duty of worship; and in the
selection of the form of this worship originates the various creeds
which distinguish and distract mankind. There is a sort of geography
of religion; and I regret to think that the majority of mankind take
their creed from the clime in which they happen to be born; and that
many, and not an inconsiderable portion of mankind, suffer the sacred
torch to burn out altogether, in their contact with the world, and then
vainly imagine that they can recover the sacred fire by striking a
spark out of dogmatic theology!


ADDITION TO THE CHAPTER ON RAILROADS.

One of the most important facts which the engine-driver ought to know
is the exact time since the preceding train has passed the point of
railroad on which his own engine is.

This may be done by placing signals, about to be described, by the
side of or across the road at all places where such knowledge is most
important.

The principle to be employed is, that at the passage of those places
the engine itself should, in its transit, wind up a weight or spring.
That this weight should act upon an arm standing perpendicularly, which
would immediately commence moving slowly to the horizontal position.
This it should attain by an equable motion at the end of three, five,
or any desirable number of minutes.

The means of raising the weight may be derived either from a projection
below the engine or by one above it. The latter, which seems
preferable, might be attached to a light beam traversing the road to
which the apparatus should be fixed.

{493}




LIST OF MR. BABBAGE’S PRINTED PAPERS.


_Many applications having been made to the Author and to his
Publishers, for detached Papers which he has from time to time printed,
he takes this opportunity of giving a list of those Papers, with
references to the Works in which they may be found._

1. The Preface; jointly with Sir John Herschel.—_Memoirs of the
Analytical Society. 4to. Cambridge, 1813._

2. On Continued Products.—_Ibid._

3. An Essay towards the Calculus of Functions.—_Phil. Trans._ 1815.

4. An Essay towards the Calculus of Functions, Part. 2.—_Phil. Trans._
1816. P. 179.

5. Demonstrations of some of Dr. Matthew Stewart’s General Theorems, to
which is added an Account of some New Properties of the Circle.—_Roy.
Inst. Jour._ 1816. Vol. i. p. 6.

6. Observations on the Analogy which subsists between the Calculus of
Functions and other branches of Analysis.—_Phil. Trans._ 1817. P. 179.

7. Solution of some Problems by means of the Calculus of
Functions.—_Roy. Inst. Jour._ 1817. P. 371.

8. Note respecting Elimination.—_Roy. Inst. Jour._ 1817. P. 355.

9. An Account of Euler’s Method of Solving a Problem relating to the
Knight’s Move at Chess.—_Roy. Inst. Jour._ 1817. P. 72.

10. On some new Methods of Investigating the Sums of several Classes of
Infinite Series.—_Phil. Trans._ 1819. P. 245.

11. Demonstration of a Theorem relating to Prime Numbers.—_Edin. Phil.
Jour._ 1819. P. 46.

12. An Examination of some Questions connected with Games of
Chance.—_Trans. of Roy. Soc. of Edin._ 1820. Vol. ix. p. 153.

13. Observations on the Notation employed in the Calculus of
Functions.—_Trans. of Cam. Phil. Soc._ 1820. Vol. i. p. 63.

14. On the Application of Analysis, &c. to the Discovery of Local
Theorems and Porisms.—_Trans. of Roy. Soc. of Edin._ Vol. ix. p. 337.
1820.

15. Translation of the Differential and Integral Calculus of La Croix,
1 vol. 1816.

16. Examples to the Differential and Integral Calculus. 2 vols. 8vo.
1820.

     The above two works were executed in conjunction with the Rev. G.
     Peacock (Dean of Ely) and Sir John Herschel, Bart.

17. Examples of the Solution of Functional Equations. Extracted from
the preceding. 8vo. 1820.

18. Note respecting the Application of Machinery to the Calculation of
Mathematical Tables.—_Memoirs of the Astron. Soc._ _June, 1822._ Vol.
i. p. 309.

19. A Letter to Sir H. Davy, P.R.S., on the Application of Machinery
to the purpose of calculating and printing Mathematical Tables. 4to.
_July, 1822._

20. On the Theoretical Principles of the Machinery for calculating
Tables.—_Brewster’s Edin. Jour. of Science._ Vol. viii. p. 122. 1822.

21. Observations on the application of Machinery to the Computations of
Mathematical Tables, Dec. 1822.—_Memoirs of Astron. Soc._ 1824. Vol. i.
p. 311.

22. On the Determination of the General Term of a new Class of Infinite
Series.—_Trans. Cam. Phil. Soc._ 1824. Vol. ii. p. 218. {494}

23. Observations on the Measurement of Heights by the
Barometer.—_Brewster’s Edin. Jour. of Science_, 1824. P. 85.

24. On a New Zenith Micrometer.—_Mem. Astro. Soc._ March, 1825.

25. Account of the repetition of M. Arago’s Experiments on the
Magnetism manifested by various substances during Rotation. By C.
Babbage, Esq. and Sir John Herschel.—_Phil. Trans._ 1825. P. 467.

26. On the Diving Bell.—_Ency. Metrop._ 4to. 1826.

27. On Electric and Magnetic Rotation.—_Phil. Trans._ 1826. Vol. ii. p.
494.

28. On a method of expressing by Signs the Action of Machinery.—_Phil.
Trans._ 1826. Vol. ii. p. 250.

29. On the Influence of Signs in Mathematical Reasoning.—_Trans. Cam.
Phil. Soc._ 1826. Vol. ii. p. 218.

30. A Comparative View of the different Institutions for the Assurance
of Life. 1 vol. 8vo. 1826. German Translation. Weimar, 1827.

31. On Notation.—_Edinburgh Encyclopedia._ 4to.

32. On Porisms.—_Edinburgh Encyclopedia._ 4to.

33. A Table of the Logarithms of the Natural Numbers, from 1 to
108,000. Stereotyped. 1 vol. 8vo. 1826.

34. Three editions on coloured paper, with the Preface and Instructions
translated into German and Hungarian, by Mr. Chas. Nagy, have been
published at Pesth and Vienna. 1834.

35. Notice respecting some Errors common to many Tables of
Logarithms.—_Mem. Astron. Soc._ 4to. 1827. Vol. iii. p. 65.

Evidence on Savings-Banks, before a Committee of the House of Commons,
1827.

36. Essay on the general Principles which regulate the Application of
Machinery.—_Ency. Metrop._ 4to. 1829.

37. Letter to T. P. Courtenay on the Proportion of Births of the two
Sexes amongst Legitimate and Illegitimate Children.—_Brewster’s Edin.
Jour. of Science._ Vol. ii. p. 85. 1829. This letter was translated
into French and published by M. Villermé, Member of the Institute of
France.

38. Account of the great Congress of Philosophers at Berlin, on 18
Sept. 1828.—Communicated by a Correspondent [C. B.]. _Edin. Journ. of
Science by David Brewster._ Vol. x. p. 225. 1829.

39. Note on the Description of Mammalia.—_Edin. Jour. of Science_,
1829. Vol. i. p. 187. _Ferussac Bull_, vol. xxv. p. 296.

40. Reflections on the Decline of Science in England, and on some of
its Causes. 4to. and 8vo. 1830.

41. Sketch of the Philosophical Characters of Dr. Wollaston and Sir H.
Davy. Extracted from the _Decline of Science_. 1830.

42. On the Proportion of Letters occurring in Various Languages, in a
letter to M. Quételet.—_Correspondence Mathematique et Physique._ Tom.
vi. p. 136.

43. Specimen of Logarithmic Tables, printed with different coloured
inks and on variously-coloured papers, in twenty-one volumes 8vo.
London. 1831.

     The object of this Work, of which _one single copy only_ was
     printed, is to ascertain by experiment the tints of the paper and
     colours of the inks least fatiguing to the eye.

     One hundred and fifty-one variously-coloured papers were chosen,
     and the same two pages of my stereotype Table of Logarithms were
     printed upon them in inks of the following colours: light blue,
     dark blue, light green, dark green, olive, yellow, light red, dark
     red, purple, and black.

     Each of these twenty volumes contains papers of the same colour,
     numbered in the same order, and there are two volumes printed with
     each kind of ink. {495}

     The twenty-first volume contains metallic printing of the
     same specimen in gold, silver, and copper, upon vellum and on
     variously-coloured papers.

     For the same purpose, about thirty-five copies of the complete
     table of logarithms were printed on thick drawing paper of various
     tints.

     An account of this work may be found in the _Edin. Journ. of
     Science_ (_Brewster’s_), 1832. Vol. vi. p. 144.

44. Economy of Manufactures and Machinery. 8vo. 1832.

     There are many editions and also American reprints, and several
     Translations of this Work into German, French, Italian, Spanish,
     &c.

45. Letter to Sir David Brewster, on the Advantage of a Collection of
the Constants of Nature and Art.—_Brewster’s Edin. Jour. of Science._
1832. Vol. vi. p. 334. Reprinted by order of the British Association
for the Promotion of Science. Cambridge, 1833. See also pp. 484, 490,
Report of the Third Meeting of the British Association. Reprinted in
Compte Rendu des Traveaux du Congres Général de Statistique, Bruxelles,
Sept. 1853.

46. Barometrical Observations, made at the Fall of the Staubbach, by
Sir John Herschel, Bart., and C. Babbage, Esq.—_Brewster’s Edin. Jour.
of Science._ Vol. vi. p. 224. 1832.

47. Abstract of a Paper, entitled Observations on the Temple of
Serapis, at Pozzuoli, near Naples; with an attempt to explain the
causes of the frequent elevation and depression of large portions of
the earth’s surface in remote periods, and to prove that those causes
continue in action at the present time. Read at Geological Society, 12
March, 1834. See _Abstract of Proceedings of Geol. Soc._ Vol. ii. p. 72.

     This was the first _printed_ publication of Mr. Babbage’s
     Geological Theory of the Isothermal Surfaces of the Earth.

48. The Paper itself was published in the _Proceedings of the
Geological Soc._ 1846.

49. Reprint of the same, with Supplemental Conjectures on the Physical
State of the Surface of the Moon. 1847.

50. Letter from Mr. Abraham Sharpe to Mr. J. Crosthwait, Hoxton, 2 Feb.
1721–22. Deciphered by Mr. Babbage. See _Life of Flamsteed_, by Mr. F.
Baily. Appendix, pp. 348, 390. 1835.

51. The Ninth Bridgewater Treatise. 8vo. May, 1837; Second Edition,
Jan. 1838.

52. On some Impressions in Sandstone.—_Proceedings of Geological
Society._ Vol. ii. p. 439. Ditto, _Phil. Mag._ Ser. 3. Vol. x. p. 474.
1837.

52*. Short account of a method by which Engraving on Wood may
be rendered more useful for the Illustration and Description of
Machinery.—_Report of Meeting of British Association at Newcastle._
1838. P. 154.

53. Letter to the Members of the British Association. 8vo. 1839.

54. General Plan, No. 25, of Mr. Babbage’s Great Calculating or
Analytical Engine, lithographed at Paris. 24 by 36 inches. 1840.

55. Statement of the circumstances respecting Mr. Babbage’s Calculating
Engines. 8vo. 1843.

56. Note on the Boracic Acid Works in Tuscany.—_Murray’s Handbook of
Central Italy._ First Edition, p. 178. 1843.

57. On the Principles of Tools for Turning and Planing Metals, by
Charles Babbage. Printed in the Appendix of Vol. ii. Holtzapffel
Turning and Mechanical Manipulation. 1846.

58. On the Planet Neptune.—_The Times_, 15th March, 1847.

59. Thoughts on the Principles of Taxation, with reference to a
Property Tax and its Exceptions. 8vo. 1848. Second Edition, 1851. Third
Edition, 1852.

     An Italian translation of the first edition, with notes, was
     published at Turin, in 1851. {496}

60. Note respecting the pink projections from the Sun’s disc observed
during the total solar eclipse in 1851.—_Proceedings of the Astron.
Soc._, vol. xii., No. 7.

61. Laws of Mechanical Notation, with Lithographic Plate. Privately
printed for distribution. 4to. July, 1851.

62. Note respecting Lighthouses (Occulting Lights). 8vo. Nov. 1851.

 Communicated to the Trinity House, 30 Nov. 1851.

 Reprinted in the Appendix to the Report on Lighthouses presented to
 the Senate of the United States, Feb. 1852.

 Reprinted in the _Mechanics’ Magazine_, and in various other
 periodicals and newspapers. 1852–3.

 It was reprinted in various parts of the Report of Commissioners
 appointed to examine into the state of Lighthouses. Parliamentary
 Paper. 1861.

63. The Exposition of 1851; or, Views of the Industry, the Science, and
the Government of England. 6 _s._ 6 _d._ Second Edition, 1851.

64. On the Statistics of Light-houses. Compte Rendu des Traveaux du
Congres Général, Bruxelles, Sept. 1853.

65. A short description of Mr. Babbage’s Ophthalmoscope is contained in
the Report on the Ophthalmoscope by T. Wharton Jones, F.R.S.—_British
and Foreign Medical Review._ Oct. 1854. Vol. xiv. p. 551.

66. On Secret or Cipher Writing. Mr. T.’s Cipher Deciphered by
C.—_Jour. Soc. Arts_, July, 1854, p. 707.

67. On Mr. T.’s Second Inscrutable Cipher Deciphered by C.—_Jour. Soc.
Arts_, p. 777, Aug. 1854.

68. On Submarine Navigation.—_Illustrated News_, 23rd June, 1855.

69. Letter to the Editor of the Times, on Occulting Lights for
Lighthouses and Night Signals. Flashing Lights at Sebastopol. 16th
July, 1855.

70. On a Method of Laying Guns in a Battery without exposing the men to
the shot of the enemy. _The Times_, 8 Aug., 1855.

71. Sur la Machine Suédoise de M. Scheutz pour Calculer les Tables
Mathématiques. 4to. _Comptes Rendus et l’Académie des Sciences._ Paris,
Oct. 8, 1855.

72. On the Action of Ocean-currents in the Formation of the Strata of
the Earth.—_Quarterly Journal Geological Society_, Nov. 1856.

73. Observations by Charles Babbage, on the Mechanical Notation of
Scheutz’s Difference Engine, prepared and drawn up by his Son, Major
Henry Prevost Babbage, addressed to the Institution of Civil Engineers.
_Minutes of Proceedings_, vol. xv. 1856.

74. Statistics of the Clearing-House. Reprinted from _Trans. of
Statistical Soc._ 8vo. 1856.

75. Observations on Peerage for Life. July, 1833. Reprinted, 1856.

76. Observations addressed to the President and Fellows of the Royal
Society on the Award of their Medals for 1856. 8vo.

77. Table of the Relative Frequency of Occurrence of the Causes of
Breaking Plate-glass Windows.—_Mech. Mag._ 24th Jan. 1857.

78. On Remains of Human Art, mixed with the Bones of Extinct Races of
Animals. _Proceedings of Roy. Soc._ 26th May, 1859.

79. Passages from the Life of a Philosopher. 8vo. 1864.

80. [In the press]. History of the Analytical Engine. 4to. It will
contain Chapters V., VI., VII., and VIII., of the present Volume.
Reprint of The Translation of General Menabrea’s Sketch of the
Analytical Engine invented by Charles Babbage. From the _Bibliothèque
Universelle de Genève_, No. 82, Oct. 1842. Translated by the late
Countess of Lovelace, with extensive Notes by the Translator.


LONDON: PRINTED BY W. CLOWES AND SONS, STAMFORD STREET AND CHARING
CROSS.



TRANSCRIBER’S NOTE


Original spelling and grammar have been generally retained, with some
exceptions noted below. Original printed page numbers are shown in
curly brackets like this: {52}. Original small caps are now uppercase.
Italics look _like this_. A character string such as “_{_x_}”
means that italic “x” is to be regarded as subscripted. A string
like “^{100}” means that “100” is superscript. Footnotes have been
relabeled 1–65, and moved from within paragraphs to nearby locations
between paragraphs. Many of the page headers in the original book
were significant as text headings, and have been retained, formatted
as all capital letters in angle brackets, e.g. “〈DIFFICULTIES NOT
ANSWERED.〉”. These have been inserted into the running text at the
appropriate places between paragraphs. Occasionally such location
might be somewhere in the page preceding the printed page header. The
transcriber produced the cover image and hereby assigns it to the
public domain. Large curly brackets, intended to graphically indicate
the combination of information on two or more lines of text, were
eliminated. The related text was restructured appropriately to retain
the original meaning. Instances include page 61, page 276, and page
364. Original page images are available from archive.org—search for
“passagesfromlife03char”.


Page 19: “twelvemouth” to “twelvemonth”. “acccomplished” to
“accomplished”.

Page 22: “appeard” to “appeared”. “hankerchiefs” to “handkerchiefs”.

Page 54. The archaic practice of placing a left double quotation mark
at the beginning of each quoted line has been relinquished in favor of
modern English practice. Also, the right double quotation mark after
“composing it.” was removed, to conform with such practice.

Page 71. The footnote said “See Note on next page.”. This footnote has
been replaced by the referenced Note.

Page 89: “gradully” to “gradually”.

Page 116: “impossibilty” to “impossibility”.

Page 190: “Albermarle-street” to “Albemarle-street”.

Page 195: “HUMBOLT” to “HUMBOLDT”.

Page 234: “Hobb’s” to “Hobbs’s”

Page 240. The first "table" on the original printed page was not a
well-structured data table. This table has been considerably altered,
forming a new table followed by a list.

Page 245: “villanons” to “villanous”.

Page 283: “Tursntile” to “Turnstile”, (in small caps or all caps,
depending on the ebook edition).

Page 324. The unmatched right double quotation mark after ‘but had
missed it.’ was removed.

Page 338: “elevavation” to “elevation”.

Page 348: “philospher” to “philosopher”.

Page 384: “eylids” to “eyelids”.

Page 427. A matching right double quotation mark was inserted after
‘two Foreigners.’.

Page 435: “obvervations” to “observations”.

Page 495. There are two entries numbered “52”, the second one has an
asterisk following: “52*. Short account of . . .”. The reason for the
asterisk is not clear to the transcriber, unless perhaps to point to
the duplicated entry number.













*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PASSAGES FROM THE LIFE OF A PHILOSOPHER ***


    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


